When the Caliph had told his history to the owl, she thanked him, and
said: "Listen to my story, also, and hear how I am no less unfortunate
than thyself. My father is the king of India; I, his only, unfortunate
daughter, am called Lusa. That same sorcerer Kaschnur, who transformed
you, has plunged me also in this affliction. He came, one day, to my
father, and asked me in marriage for his son Mizra. My father,
however, who is a passionate man, cast him down the steps. The wretch
managed to creep up to me again under another form, and as I was on
one occasion taking the fresh air in my garden, clad as a slave, he
presented me a potion which changed me into this detestable figure. He
brought me hither, swooning through fear, and exclaimed in my ear with
awful voice, 'There shalt thou remain, frightful one, despised even by
beasts, until thy death, or till one, of his own free will, even
under this execrable form, take thee to wife. Thus revenge I myself
upon thee, and thy haughty father!'

"Since then, many months have elapsed; alone and mournfully I live,
like a hermit, in these walls, abhorred by the world, an abomination
even to brutes. Beautiful nature is shut out from me; for I am blind
by day, and only when the moon sheds her wan light upon this ruin,
falls the shrouding veil from mine eye."

The owl ended, and again wiped her eyes with her wing, for the
narration of her wo had called forth tears. The Caliph was plunged in
deep meditation by the story of the Princess. "If I am not altogether
deceived," said he, "you will find that between our misfortunes a
secret connection exists; but where can I find the key to this
enigma?"

The owl answered him, "My lord! this also is plain to me; for once, in
early youth, it was foretold to me by a wise woman, that a stork would
bring me great happiness, and perhaps I might know how we may save
ourselves."

The Caliph was much astonished, and inquired in what way she meant.

"The enchanter who has made us both miserable," said she, "comes once
every month to these ruins. Not far from this chamber is a hall;
there, with many confederates, he is wont to banquet. Already I have
often watched them: they relate to one another their shameful
deeds--perhaps he might then mention the magic word which you have
forgotten."

"Oh, dearest Princess!" exclaimed the Caliph: "tell us--when will he
come, and where is the hall?"

The owl was silent a moment, and then said: "Take it not unkindly, but
only on one condition can I grant your wish."

"Speak out! speak out!" cried Chasid. "Command; whatever it may be, I
am ready to obey."

"It is this: I would fain at the same time be free; this, however, can
only take place, if one of you offer me his hand." At this proposition
the storks seemed somewhat surprised, and the Caliph beckoned to his
attendant to step aside with him a moment. "Grand-Vizier," said the
Caliph before the door, "this is a stupid affair, but you can set it
all right."

"Thus?" rejoined he; "that my wife, when I go home, may scratch my
eyes out? Besides, I am an old man, while you are still young and
unmarried, and can better give your hand to a young and beautiful
princess."

"Ah! that is the point," sighed the Caliph, as he mournfully drooped
his wings: "who told you she is young and fair? That is equivalent to
buying a cat in a sack!" They continued to converse together for a
long time, but finally, when the Caliph saw that Mansor would rather
remain a stork than marry the owl, he determined sooner, himself, to
accept the condition. The owl was overjoyed; she avowed to them that
they could have come at no better time, since, probably, that very
night, the sorcerers would assemble together.

She left the apartment with the storks, in order to lead them to the
saloon; they went a long way through a gloomy passage, until at last a
very bright light streamed upon them through a half-decayed wall. When
they reached this place, the owl advised them to halt very quietly.
From the breach, near which they were standing, they could look down
upon a large saloon, adorned all around with pillars, and splendidly
decorated, in which many colored lamps restored the light of day. In
the midst of the saloon stood a round table, laden with various choice
meats. Around the table extended a sofa, on which eight men were
seated. In one of these men the storks recognised the very merchant,
who had sold them the magic powder. His neighbor desired him to tell
them his latest exploits; whereupon he related, among others, the
story of the Caliph and his Vizier.

"What did you give them for a word?" inquired of him one of the other
magicians.

"A right ponderous Latin one--MUTABOR."