The lady then came to us, and said, Bring me a cup of water:--and when
it was brought to her, she pronounced over it some words which we
understood not, and, sprinkling me with it, said, Be restored, by
virtue of the name of the Truth, and by virtue of the most great name of
God, to thy original form!--whereupon I became a man as I was at first,
excepting that my eye was destroyed. After this, she cried out, The
fire! the fire! O my father, I shall no longer live, for I am
predestined to be killed. Had he been a human being, I had killed him at
the first of the encounter. I experienced no difficulty till the
scattering of the grains of the pomegranate, when I picked them up
excepting the one in which was the life of the Jinnee: had I picked up
that, he had instantly died; but I saw it not, as fate and destiny had
appointed; and suddenly he came upon me, and a fierce contest ensued
between us under the earth, and in the air, and in the water; and every
time that he tried against me a new mode, I employed against him one
more potent, until he tried against me the mode of fire; and rarely does
one escape against whom the mode of fire is employed. Destiny, however,
aided me, so that I burned him first; but I exhorted him previously to
embrace the faith of El-Islam. Now I die; and may God supply my place to
you.--Having thus said, she ceased not to pray for relief from the fire;
and lo, a spark ascended to her breast, and thence to her face; and when
it reached her face, she wept, and exclaimed, I testify that there is no
deity but God, and I testify that Moammad is God's Apostle!--We then
looked towards her, and saw that she had become a heap of ashes by the
side of the ashes of the 'Efreet.

We were plunged into grief on her account, and I wished that I had been
in her place rather than have seen that sweet-faced creature who had
done me this kindness reduced to a heap of ashes: but the decree of God
cannot be averted. The King, on beholding his daughter in this state,
plucked out what remained of his beard, and slapped his face, and rent
his clothes; and I also did the same, while we both wept for her. Then
came the chamberlains and other great officers of the court, who,
finding the King in a state of insensibility, with two heaps of ashes
before him, were astonished, and remained encompassing him until he
recovered from his fit, when he informed them of what had befallen his
daughter with the 'Efreet; and great was their affliction. The women
shrieked, with the female slaves, and continued their mourning seven
days. After this, the King gave orders to build, over the ashes of his
daughter, a great tomb with a dome, and illuminated it with candles and
lamps: but the ashes of the 'Efreet they scattered in the wind, exposing
them to the curse of God. The King then fell sick, and was near unto
death: his illness lasted a month; but after this he recovered his
health, and, summoning me to his presence, said to me, O young man, we
passed our days in the enjoyment of the utmost happiness, secure from
the vicissitudes of fortune, until thou camest to us, when troubles
overcame us. Would that we had never seen thee, nor thy ugly form, on
account of which we have been reduced to this state of privation: for,
in the first place, I have lost my daughter, who was worth a hundred
men; and, secondly, I have suffered this burning, and lost my teeth: my
eunuch also is dead: but it was not in thy power to prevent these
afflictions: the decree of God hath been fulfilled on us and on thee;
and praise be to God that my daughter restored thee, though she
destroyed herself. Now, however, depart, O my son, from my city. It is
enough that hath happened on thy account; but as it was decreed against
us and thee, depart in peace.

So I departed, O my mistress, from his presence; but before I quitted
the city, I entered a public bath, and shaved my beard. I traversed
various regions, and passed through great cities, and bent my course to
the Abode of Peace, Baghdad, in the hope of obtaining an
interview with the Prince of the Faithful, that I might relate to him
all that had befallen me.

The third mendicant then advanced, and thus related his story:--


THE STORY OF THE THIRD ROYAL MENDICANT.

O illustrious lady, my story is not like those of my two companions, but
more wonderful: the course of fate and destiny brought upon them events
against which they could not guard; but as to myself, the shaving of my
beard and the loss of my eye were occasioned by my provoking fate and
misfortune; and the cause was this:--

I was a King, and the son of a King; and when my father died, I
succeeded to his throne, and governed my subjects with justice and
beneficence. I took pleasure in sea-voyages; and my capital was on the
shore of an extensive sea, interspersed with fortified and garrisoned
islands, which I desired, for my amusement, to visit; I therefore
embarked with a fleet of ten ships, and took with me provisions
sufficient for a whole month. I proceeded twenty days, after which there
arose against us a contrary wind; but at daybreak it ceased, and the sea
became calm, and we arrived at an island, where we landed, and cooked
some provisions and ate; after which we remained there two days. We
then continued our voyage; and when twenty days more had passed, we
found ourselves in strange waters, unknown to the captain, and desired
the watch to look out from the mast-head: so he went aloft, and when he
had come down he said to the captain, I saw, on my right hand, fish
floating upon the surface of the water; and looking towards the midst of
the sea, I perceived something looming in the distance, sometimes black,
and sometimes white.

When the captain heard this report of the watch, he threw his turban on
the deck, and plucked his beard, and said to those who were with him,
Receive warning of our destruction, which will befall all of us: not one
will escape! So saying, he began to weep; and all of us in like manner
bewailed our lot. I desired him to inform us of that which the watch had
seen. O my lord, he replied, know that we have wandered from our course
since the commencement of the contrary wind that was followed in the
morning by a calm, in consequence of which we remained stationary two
days: from that period we have deviated from our course for twenty-one
days, and we have no wind to carry us back from the fate which awaits us
after this day: to-morrow we shall arrive at a mountain of black stone,
called loadstone: the current is now bearing us violently towards it,
and the ships will fall in pieces, and every nail in them will fly to
the mountain, and adhere to it; for God hath given to the loadstone a
secret property by virtue of which everything of iron is attracted
towards it. On that mountain is such a quantity of iron as no one
knoweth but God, whose name be exalted; for from times of old great
numbers of ships have been destroyed by the influence of that
mountain. There is, upon the summit of the mountain, a
cupola of brass supported by ten columns, and upon the top of this
cupola is a horseman upon a horse of brass, having in his hand a brazen
spear, and upon his breast suspended a tablet of lead, upon which are
engraved mysterious names and talismans: and as long, O King, as this
horseman remains upon the horse, so long will every ship that approaches
be destroyed, with every person on board, and all the iron contained in
it will cleave to the mountain: no one will be safe until the horseman
shall have fallen from the horse.--The captain then wept bitterly; and
we felt assured that our destruction was inevitable, and every one of us
bade adieu to his friend.



On the following morning we drew near to the mountain; the current
carried us towards it with violence, and when the ships were almost
close to it, they fell asunder, and all the nails, and every thing else
that was of iron, flew from them towards the loadstone. It was near the
close of day when the ships fell in pieces. Some of us were drowned, and
some escaped; but the greater number were drowned, and of those who
saved their lives none knew what became of the others, so stupefied were
they by the waves and the boisterous wind. As for myself, O my mistress,
God, whose name be exalted, spared me on account of the trouble and
torment and affliction that He had predestined to befall me. I placed
myself upon a plank, and the wind and waves cast it upon the mountain;
and when I had landed, I found a practicable way to the summit,
resembling steps cut in the rock: so I exclaimed, In the name of
God!--and offered up a prayer, and attempted the ascent, holding fast by
the notches; and presently God stilled the wind and assisted me in my
endeavours, so that I arrived in safety at the summit. Rejoicing greatly
in my escape, I immediately entered the cupola, and performed the
prayers of two rek'ahs in gratitude to God for my
preservation; after which I slept beneath the cupola, and heard a voice
saying to me, O son of Khaeeb, when thou awakest from thy
sleep, dig beneath thy feet, and thou wilt find a bow of brass, and
three arrows of lead, whereon are engraved talismans: then take the bow
and arrows and shoot at the horseman that is upon the top of the cupola,
and relieve mankind from this great affliction; for when thou hast shot
at the horseman he will fall into the sea; the bow will also fall, and
do thou bury it in its place; and as soon as thou hast done this, the
sea will swell and rise until it attains the summit of the mountain;
and there will appear upon it a boat bearing a man, different from him
whom thou shalt have cast down, and he will come to thee, having an oar
in his hand: then do thou embark with him; but utter not the name of
God; and he will convey thee in ten days to a safe sea, where, on thy
arrival, thou wilt find one who will take thee to thy city. All this
shall be done if thou utter not the name of God.

Awaking from my sleep, I sprang up, and did as the voice had directed. I
shot at the horseman, and he fell into the sea; and the bow having
fallen from my hand, I buried it: the sea then became troubled, and rose
to the summit of the mountain, and when I had stood waiting there a
little while, I beheld a boat in the midst of the sea, approaching me. I
praised God, whose name be exalted, and when the boat came to me, I
found in it a man of brass, with a tablet of lead upon his breast,
engraven with names and talismans. Without uttering a word, I embarked
in the boat, and the man rowed me ten successive days, after which I
beheld the islands of security, whereupon, in the excess of my joy, I
exclaimed, In the name of God! There is no deity but God! God is most
great!--and as soon as I had done this, he cast me out of the boat, and
sank in the sea.



Being able to swim, I swam until night, when my arms and shoulders were
tired, and, in this perilous situation, I repeated the profession of
the faith, and gave myself up as lost; but the sea rose with the
violence of the wind, and a wave like a vast castle threw me upon the
land, in order to the accomplishment of the purpose of God. I ascended
the shore, and after I had wrung out my clothes, and spread them upon
the ground to dry, I slept; and in the morning I put on my clothes
again, and, looking about to see which way I should go, I found a tract
covered with trees, to which I advanced; and when I had walked round it,
I found that I was upon a small island in the midst of the sea; upon
which I said within myself, Every time that I escape from one calamity I
fall into another that is worse:--but while I was reflecting upon my
unfortunate case, and wishing for death, I beheld a vessel bearing a
number of men. I arose immediately, and climbed into a tree; and lo, the
vessel came to the shore, and there landed from it ten black slaves
bearing axes. They proceeded to the middle of the island, and, digging
up the earth, uncovered and lifted up a trap-door, after which they
returned to the vessel, and brought from it bread and flour and
clarified butter and honey and sheep and everything that the wants of an
inhabitant would require, continuing to pass backwards and forwards
between the vessel and the trap-door, bringing loads from the former,
and entering the latter, until they had removed all the stores from the
ship. They then came out of the vessel with various clothes of the most
beautiful description, and in the midst of them was an old sheykh,
enfeebled and wasted by extreme age, leading by the hand a young man
cast in the mould of graceful symmetry, and invested with such perfect
beauty as deserved to be a subject for proverbs. He was like a fresh and
slender twig, enchanting and captivating every heart by his elegant
form. The party proceeded to the trap-door, and, entering it, became
concealed from my eyes.

They remained beneath about two hours, or more; after which, the sheykh
and the slaves came out; but the youth came not with them; and they
replaced the earth, and embarked and set sail. Soon after, I descended
from the tree, and went to the excavation. I removed the earth, and,
entering the aperture, saw a flight of wooden steps, which I descended;
and, at the bottom, I beheld a handsome dwelling-place, furnished with a
variety of silken carpets; and there was the youth, sitting upon a high
mattress, with sweet-smelling flowers and fruits placed before him. On
seeing me, his countenance became pale; but I saluted him, and said, Let
thy mind be composed, O my master: thou hast nothing to fear, O delight
of my eye; for I am a man, and the son of a King, like thyself: fate
hath impelled me to thee, that I may cheer thee in thy solitude. The
youth, when he heard me thus address him, and was convinced that I was
one of his own species, rejoiced exceedingly at my arrival, his colour
returned, and, desiring me to approach him, he said, O my brother, my
story is wonderful: my father is a jeweller: he had slaves who made
voyages by his orders, for the purposes of commerce, and he had dealings
with Kings; but he had never been blest with a son; and he dreamt that
he was soon to have a son, but one whose life would be short; and he
awoke sorrowful. Shortly after, in accordance with the
decrees of God, my mother conceived me, and when her time was complete,
she gave birth to me; and my father was greatly rejoiced: the
astrologers, however, came to him, and said, Thy son will live fifteen
years: his fate is intimated by the fact that there is, in the sea, a
mountain called the Mountain of Loadstone, whereon is a horseman on a
horse of brass, on the former of which is a tablet of lead suspended to
his neck; and when the horseman shall be thrown down from his horse, thy
son will be slain: the person who is to slay him is he who will throw
down the horseman, and his name is King 'Ajeeb, the son of
King Khaeeb. My father was greatly afflicted at this announcement; and
when he had reared me until I had nearly attained the age of fifteen
years, the astrologers came again, and informed him that the horseman
had fallen into the sea, and that it had been thrown down by King
'Ajeeb, the son of King Khaeeb; on hearing which, he prepared for me
this dwelling, and here left me to remain until the completion of the
term, of which there now remain ten days. All this he did from fear lest
King 'Ajeeb should kill me.

When I heard this, I was filled with wonder, and said within myself, I
am King 'Ajeeb, the son of King Khaeeb, and it was I who threw down the
horseman; but, by Allah, I will neither kill him nor do him any injury.
Then said I to the youth, Far from thee be both destruction and harm, if
it be the will of God, whose name be exalted: thou hast nothing to fear:
I will remain with thee to serve thee, and will go forth with thee to
thy father, and beg of him to send me back to my country, for the which
he will obtain a reward. The youth rejoiced at my words, and I sat and
conversed with him until night, when I spread his bed for him, and
covered him, and slept near to his side. And in the morning I brought
him water, and he washed his face, and said to me, May God requite thee
for me with every blessing. If I escape from King 'Ajeeb, I will make my
father reward thee with abundant favours.--Never, I replied, may the day
arrive that would bring thee misfortune. I then placed before him some
refreshments, and after we had eaten together, we passed the day
conversing with the utmost cheerfulness.



I continued to serve him for nine days; and on the tenth day the youth
rejoiced at finding himself in safety, and said to me, O my brother, I
wish that thou wouldst in thy kindness warm for me some water, that I
may wash myself and change my clothes; for I have smelt the odour of
escape from death, in consequence of thy assistance.--With pleasure, I
replied;--and I arose, and warmed the water; after which, he entered a
place concealed from my view, and, having washed himself and changed his
clothes, laid himself upon the mattress to rest after his bath. He then
said to me, Cut up for me, O my brother, a water-melon, and mix its
juice with some sugar:--so I arose, and, taking a melon, brought it upon
a plate, and said to him, Knowest thou, O my master, where is the
knife?--See, here it is, he answered, upon the shelf over my head. I
sprang up hastily, and took it from its sheath, and as I was drawing
back, my foot slipped, as God had decreed, and I fell upon the youth,
grasping in my hand the knife, which entered his body, and he died
instantly. When I perceived that he was dead, and that I had killed him,
I uttered a loud shriek, and beat my face, and rent my clothes, saying,
This is, indeed, a calamity! O what a calamity! O my Lord, I implore thy
pardon, and declare to Thee my innocence of his death! Would that I had
died before him! How long shall I devour trouble after trouble!

With these reflections I ascended the steps, and, having replaced the
trap-door, returned to my first station, and looked over the sea, where
I saw the vessel that had come before, approaching, and cleaving the
waves in its rapid course. Upon this I said within myself, Now will the
men come forth from the vessel, and find the youth slain, and they will
slay me also:--so I climbed into a tree, and concealed myself among its
leaves, and sat there till the vessel arrived and cast anchor, when the
slaves landed with the old sheykh, the father of the youth, and went to
the place, and removed the earth. They were surprised at finding it
moist, and, when they had descended the steps, they discovered the youth
lying on his back, exhibiting a face beaming with beauty, though dead,
and clad in white and clean clothing, with the knife remaining in his
body. They all wept at the sight, and the father fell down in a swoon,
which lasted so long that the slaves thought he was dead. At length,
however, he recovered, and came out with the slaves, who had wrapped the
body of the youth in his clothes. They then took back all that was in
the subterranean dwelling to the vessel, and departed.

I remained, O my mistress, by day hiding myself in a tree, and at night
walking about the open part of the island. Thus I continued for the
space of two months; and I perceived that, on the western side of the
island, the water of the sea every day retired, until, after three
months, the land that had been beneath it became dry. Rejoicing at this,
and feeling confident now in my escape, I traversed this dry tract, and
arrived at an expanse of sand; whereupon I emboldened myself, and
crossed it. I then saw in the distance an appearance of fire, and,
advancing towards it, found it to be a palace, overlaid with plates of
copper, which, reflecting the rays of the sun, seemed from a distance to
be fire: and when I drew near to it, reflecting upon this sight, there
approached me an old sheykh, accompanied by ten young men who were all
blind of one eye, at which I was extremely surprised. As soon as they
saw me, they saluted me, and asked me my story, which I related to them
from first to last; and they were filled with wonder. They then
conducted me into the palace, where I saw ten benches, upon each of
which was a mattress covered with a blue stuff; and each of
the young men seated himself upon one of these benches, while the sheykh
took his place upon a smaller one; after which they said to me, Sit
down, O young man, and ask no question respecting our condition, nor
respecting our being blind of one eye. Then the sheykh arose, and
brought to each of them some food, and the same to me also; and next he
brought to each of us some wine: and after we had eaten, we sat drinking
together until the time for sleep, when the young men said to the
sheykh, Bring to us our accustomed supply:--upon which the sheykh arose,
and entered a closet, from which he brought, upon his head, ten covered
trays. Placing these upon the floor, he lighted ten candles, and stuck
one of them upon each tray; and, having done this, he removed the
covers, and there appeared beneath them ashes mixed with pounded
charcoal. The young men then tucked up their sleeves above the elbow,
and blackened their faces, and slapped their cheeks,
exclaiming, We were reposing at our ease, and our impertinent curiosity
suffered us not to remain so! Thus they did until the morning, when the
sheykh brought them some hot water, and they washed their faces, and put
on other clothes.

On witnessing this conduct, my reason was confounded, my heart was so
troubled that I forgot my own misfortunes, and I asked them the cause of
their strange behaviour; upon which they looked towards me, and said, O
young man, ask not respecting that which doth not concern thee; but be
silent; for in silence is security from error.--I remained with them a
whole month, during which, every night they did the same; and at length
I said to them, I conjure you by Allah to remove this disquiet from my
mind, and to inform me of the cause of your acting in this manner, and
of your exclaiming, We were reposing at our ease, and our impertinent
curiosity suffered us not to remain so!--if ye inform me not, I will
leave you, and go my way; for the proverb saith, When the eye seeth not,
the heart doth not grieve.--On hearing these words, they replied, We
have not concealed this affair from thee but in our concern for thy
welfare, lest thou shouldst become like us, and the same affliction that
hath befallen us happen also to thee. I said, however, Ye must
positively inform me of this matter.--We give thee good advice, said
they, and do thou receive it, and ask us not respecting our case;
otherwise thou wilt become blind of one eye, like us:--but I still
persisted in my request; whereupon they said, O young man, if this
befall thee, know that thou wilt be banished from our company. They then
all arose, and, taking a ram, slaughtered and skinned it, and said to
me, Take this knife with thee, and introduce thyself into the skin of
the ram, and we will sew thee up in it, and go away; whereupon a bird
called the rukh' will come to thee, and, taking thee up by
its talons, will fly away with thee, and set thee down upon a mountain:
then cut open the skin with this knife, and get out, and the bird will
fly away. Thou must arise, as soon as it hath gone, and journey for half
a day, and thou wilt see before thee a lofty palace, encased with red
gold, set with various precious stones, such as emeralds and rubies,
&c.; and if thou enter it thy case will be as ours; for our entrance
into that palace was the cause of our being blind of one eye; and if one
of us would relate to thee all that hath befallen him, his story would
be too long for thee to hear.

They then sewed me up in the skin, and entered their palace; and soon
after, there came an enormous white bird, which seized me, and flew away
with me, and set me down upon the mountain; whereupon I cut open the
skin, and got out; and the bird, as soon as it saw me, flew away. I rose
up quickly, and proceeded towards the palace, which I found to be as
they had described it to me; and when I had entered it, I beheld, at the
upper end of a saloon, forty young damsels, beautiful as so many moons,
and magnificently attired, who, as soon as they saw me, exclaimed,
Welcome! Welcome! O our master and our lord! We have been for a month
expecting thee. Praise be to God who hath blessed us with one who is
worthy of us, and one of whom we are worthy!--After having thus greeted
me, they seated me upon a mattress, and said, Thou art from this day our
master and prince, and we are thy handmaids, and entirely under thy
authority. They then brought to me some refreshments, and, when I had
eaten and drunk, they sat and conversed with me, full of joy and
happiness. So lovely were these ladies, that even a devotee, if he saw
them, would gladly consent to be their servant, and to comply with all
that they would desire. At the approach of night they all assembled
around me, and placed before me a table of fresh and dried fruits, with
other delicacies that the tongue cannot describe, and wine; and one
began to sing, while another played upon the lute. The wine-cups
circulated among us, and joy overcame me to such a degree as to
obliterate from my mind every earthly care, and make me exclaim, This
is indeed a delightful life! I passed a night of such enjoyment as I had
never before experienced; and on the morrow I entered the bath; and,
after I had washed myself, they brought me a suit of the richest
clothing, and we again sat down to a repast.

In this manner I lived with them a whole year; but on the first day of
the new year, they seated themselves around me, and began to weep, and
bade me farewell, clinging to my skirts.--What calamity hath befallen
you? said I. Ye have broken my heart.--They answered, Would that we had
never known thee; for we have associated with many men, but have seen
none like thee. May God, therefore, not deprive us of thy company.--And
they wept afresh. I said to them, I wish that you would acquaint me with
the cause of this weeping.--Thou, they replied, art the cause; yet now,
if thou wilt attend to what we tell thee, we shall never be parted; but
if thou act contrary to it, we are separated from this time; and our
hearts whisper to us that thou wilt not regard our warning.--Inform me,
said I, and I will attend to your directions:--and they replied, If then
thou wouldst inquire respecting our history, know that we are the
daughters of Kings: for many years it hath been our custom to assemble
here, and every year we absent ourselves during a period of forty days;
then returning, we indulge ourselves for a year in feasting and
drinking. This is our usual practice; and now we fear that thou wilt
disregard our directions when we are absent from thee. We deliver to
thee the keys of the palace, which are a hundred in number, belonging to
a hundred closets. Open each of these, and amuse thyself, and eat and
drink, and refresh thyself, excepting the closet that hath a door of red
gold; for if thou open this, the consequence will be a separation
between us and thee. We conjure thee, therefore, to observe our
direction, and to be patient during this period.--Upon hearing this, I
swore to them that I would never open the closet to which they alluded;
and they departed, urging me to be faithful to my promise.



I remained alone in the palace, and at the approach of evening I opened
the first closet, and, entering it, found a mansion like paradise, with
a garden containing green trees loaded with ripe fruits, abounding with
singing birds, and watered by copious streams. My heart was soothed by
the sight, and I wandered among the trees, scenting the fragrance of the
flowers, and listening to the warbling of the birds as they sang the
praises of the One, the Almighty. After admiring the
mingled colours of the apple resembling the hue upon the cheek of a
beloved mistress and the sallow countenance of the perplexed and timid
lover, the sweet-smelling quince diffusing an odour like musk and
ambergris, and the plum shining as the ruby, I retired from this place,
and, having locked the door, opened that of the next closet, within
which I beheld a spacious tract planted with numerous palm-trees, and
watered by a river flowing among rose-trees, and jasmine, and marjoram,
and eglantine, and narcissus, and gilliflower, the odours of which,
diffused in every direction by the wind, inspired me with the utmost
delight. I locked again the door of the second closet, and opened that
of the third. Within this I found a large saloon, paved with marbles of
various colours, and with costly minerals and precious gems, and
containing cages constructed of sandal and aloes-wood with singing birds
within them, and others upon the branches of trees which were planted
there. My heart was charmed, my trouble was dissipated, and I slept
there until the morning. I then opened the door of the fourth closet,
and within this door I found a great building in which were forty
closets with open doors; and, entering these, I beheld pearls, and
rubies, and chrysolites, and emeralds, and other precious jewels such as
the tongue cannot describe. I was astonished at the sight, and said,
Such things as these, I imagine, are not found in the treasury of any
King. I am now the King of my age, and all these treasures, through the
goodness of God, are mine, together with forty damsels under my
authority who have no man to share them with me.

Thus I continued to amuse myself, passing from one place to another,
until thirty-nine days had elapsed, and I had opened the doors of all
the closets excepting that which they had forbidden me to open. My heart
was then disturbed by curiosity respecting this hundredth closet, and
the Devil, in order to plunge me into misery, induced me to open it. I
had not patience to abstain, though there remained of the appointed
period only one day: so I approached the closet, and opened the door;
and when I had entered, I perceived a fragrant odour, such as I had
never before smelt, which intoxicated me so that I fell down insensible,
and remained some time in this state: but at length recovering, I
fortified my heart, and proceeded. I found the floor overspread with
saffron, and the place illuminated by golden lamps and by candles, which
diffused the odours of musk and ambergris; and two large
perfuming-vessels filled with aloes-wood and ambergris, and a perfume
compounded with honey, spread fragrance through the whole place. I saw
also a black horse, of the hue of the darkest night, before which was a
manger of white crystal filled with cleansed sesame, and another,
similar to it, containing rose-water infused with musk: he was saddled
and bridled, and his saddle was of red gold. Wondering at the sight of
him, I said within myself, This must be an animal of extraordinary
qualities;--and, seduced by the Devil, I led him out, and mounted him;
but he moved not from his place: I kicked him with my heel; but still he
moved not: so I took a mira'ah and struck him with it; and as soon as
he felt the blow he uttered a sound like thunder, and, expanding a pair
of wings, soared with me to an immense height through the air, and then
alighted upon the roof of another palace, where he threw me from his
back, and, by a violent blow with his tail upon my face, as I sat on the
roof, struck out my eye, and left me.

In this state I descended from the roof, and below I found the one-eyed
young men before mentioned, who, as soon as they beheld me, exclaimed,
No welcome to thee!--Receive me, said I, into your company:--but they
replied, By Allah, thou shalt not remain with us:--so I departed from
them, with mournful heart and weeping eye, and, God having decreed me a
safe journey hither, I arrived at Baghdad, after I had shaved my beard,
and become a mendicant.


CONTINUATION OF THE STORY OF THE LADIES OF BAGHDAD, &c.

The mistress of the house then looked towards the Khaleefeh and Jaafar
and Mesroor, and said to them, Acquaint me with your histories:--upon
which Jaafar advanced towards her, and related to her the same story
that he had told to the portress before they entered; and when she had
heard it, she liberated them all. They accordingly departed, and when
they had gone out into the street, the Khaleefeh inquired of the
mendicants whither they were going. They answered that they knew not
whither to go: whereupon he desired them to accompany his party; and
then said to Jaafar, Take them home with thee, and bring them before me
to-morrow, and we will see the result. Jaafar, therefore, did as he was
commanded, and the Khaleefeh returned to his palace; but he was unable
to sleep during the remainder of the night.

On the following morning he sat upon his throne, and when his courtiers
had presented themselves before him, and departed, excepting Jaafar, he
said to him, Bring before me the three ladies and the two bitches and
the mendicants. So Jaafar arose, and brought them, and, placing the
ladies behind the curtains, said to them, We have forgiven you on
account of your previous kindness to us, and because ye knew us not; and
now I acquaint you that ye are in the presence of the fifth of the sons
of El-'Abbas, Haroon Er-Rasheed; therefore relate to him nothing but the
truth. And when the ladies heard the words which Jaafar addressed to
them on the part of the Khaleefeh, the eldest of them advanced, and thus
related her story:--


THE STORY OF THE FIRST OF THE THREE LADIES OF BAGHDAD.



O Prince of the Faithful, my story is wonderful; for these two
bitches are my sisters, born to my father, but of another
mother; and I am the youngest of the three. After the death of our
father, who left us five thousand pieces of gold, these my two sisters
married, and when they had resided some time with their husbands, each
of the latter prepared a stock of merchandise, and received from his
wife a thousand pieces of gold, and they all set forth on a journey
together, leaving me here; but after they had been absent four years, my
sisters' husbands lost all their property, and abandoned them in a
strange land, and they returned to me in the garb of beggars. When I
first saw them in this state, I knew them not; and, as soon as I
recognised them, I exclaimed, How is it that ye are in this
condition?--O our sister, they answered, thy inquiry now is of no use:
the Pen hath written what God hath decreed.--I sent them,
therefore, to the bath, and, having clad them in new apparel, said to
them, O my sisters, ye are my elders, and I am young; so ye shall be to
me in the places of my father and mother. The inheritance which I shared
with you God hath blessed; partake then of its increase, for my affairs
are prosperous; and I and ye shall fare alike.--I treated them with the
utmost kindness, and during a whole year they remained with me, and
enriched themselves by the money that I had given them; but after this
period they said to me, It will be more agreeable to us to marry again,
for we can no longer abstain from doing so.--O my sisters, I replied, ye
have seen no happiness in marriage: a good husband in this age is rarely
found, and ye have already had experience of the marriage-state. They,
however, heeded not my words; but married against my consent: yet I gave
them dowries from my own property, and continued to them my protection.
They went to their husbands, and the latter, after they had resided with
them a short time, defrauded them of all that they possessed, and,
setting forth on a journey, left them destitute: so again they returned
to me, and, in a state of nudity, implored my forgiveness, saying, Be
not angry with us; for though thou art younger than we, thou hast more
mature sense; and we promise thee that we will never again mention the
subject of marriage. I replied, Ye are welcome, O my sisters; for I have
no one dearer to me than yourselves:--and I received them, and treated
them with every kindness, and we remained happily together for the space
of a year.

After this I resolved to fit out a vessel for a mercantile
voyage: accordingly, I stocked a large ship with various
goods and necessary provisions, and said to my sisters, Will ye rather
stay at home during my voyage, or will ye go with me?--to which they
answered, We will accompany thee during the voyage, for we cannot endure
to be separated from thee. I therefore took them with me, and we set
sail; but first I divided my property into two equal portions; one of
which I took with me, and the other I concealed, saying within myself,
Perhaps some evil accident may happen to the ship, and our lives may be
prolonged; in which case, when we return we shall find that which will
be of service to us.--We continued our voyage by day and night, till at
length the vessel pursued a wrong course, and the captain knew not
whither to steer. The ship had entered a different sea from that which
we wished to cross, and for some time we knew it not; but for ten days
we had a pleasant wind, and after this, a city loomed before us in the
distance. We asked the captain what was the name of this city; and he
answered, I know it not; I have never seen it till this day, nor have I
ever before in the course of my life navigated this sea: but as we have
come hither in safety, ye have nothing to do but to enter this city and
land your goods, and, if ye find opportunity, sell or exchange there: if
not, we will rest there two days, and take in fresh provisions. So we
entered the port of the city, and the captain landed, and after a while
returned to us, saying, Arise, and go up into the city, and wonder at
that which God hath done unto his creatures, and pray to be preserved
from his anger. And when we had entered the city, we found all its
inhabitants converted into black stones. We were amazed at the sight,
and as we walked through the market-streets, finding the merchandise and
the gold and silver remaining in their original state, we rejoiced, and
said, This must have been occasioned by same wonderful circumstance. We
then separated in the streets, each of us attracted from his companions
by the wealth and stuffs in the shops.

As for myself, I ascended to the citadel, which I found to be a building
of admirable construction; and, entering the King's palace, I found all
the vessels of gold and silver remaining in their places, and the King
himself seated in the midst of his Chamberlains and Viceroys and
Wezeers, and clad in apparel of astonishing richness. Drawing nearer to
him, I perceived that he was sitting upon a throne adorned with pearls
and jewels, every one of the pearls shining like a star: his dress was
embroidered with gold, and around him stood fifty memlooks, attired in
silks of various descriptions, and having in their hands drawn swords.
Stupefied at this spectacle, I proceeded, and entered the saloon of the
areem, upon the walls of which were hung silken curtains; and here I
beheld the Queen, attired in a dress embroidered with fresh pearls, and
having upon her head a diadem adorned with various jewels, and necklaces
of different kinds on her neck. All her clothing and ornaments remained
as they were at first, though she herself was converted into black
stone. Here also I found an open door, and, entering it, I saw a flight
of seven steps, by which I ascended to an apartment paved with marble,
furnished with gold-embroidered carpets, and containing a couch of
alabaster, ornamented with pearls and jewels; but my eyes were first
attracted by a gleam of light, and when I approached the spot whence it
proceeded, I found a brilliant jewel, of the size of an ostrich's egg,
placed upon a small stool, diffusing a light like that of a candle. The
coverings of the couch above mentioned were of various kinds of silk,
the richness of which would surprise every beholder; and I looked at
them with wonder. In this apartment I likewise observed some lighted
candles, and reflected that there must then have been some person there
to light them. I passed thence to another part of the palace, and
continued to explore the different apartments, forgetting myself in the
amazement of my mind at all these strange circumstances, and immersed in
thoughts respecting what I beheld, until the commencement of night, when
I would have departed; but could not find the door: so I returned to the
place in which were the lighted candles, and there I laid myself upon
the couch, and, covering myself with a quilt, repeated some words of the
ur-an, and endeavoured to compose myself to sleep; but I could not. I
continued restless: and at midnight I heard a recitation of the ur-an,
performed by a melodious and soft voice; upon which I arose, and,
looking about, saw a closet with an open door, and I entered it, and
found that it was an oratory: lighted lamps were suspended in it, and
upon a prayer-carpet spread on the floor sat a young man of handsome
aspect. Wondering that he had escaped the fate of the other inhabitants
of the city, I saluted him; and he raised his eyes, and returned my
salutation: and I then said to him, I conjure thee by the truth of that
which thou art reading in the Book of God, that thou answer the question
which I am about to ask thee:--whereupon he smiled, and replied, Do thou
first acquaint me with the cause of thine entrance into this place, and
then I will answer thy question: so I told him my story, and inquired of
him the history of this city. Wait a little, said he;--and he closed the
ur-an, and, having put it in a bag of satin, seated me by his side. As
I now beheld him, his countenance appeared like the full moon, and his
whole person exhibited such perfect elegance and loveliness, that a
single glance at him drew from me a thousand sighs, and kindled a fire
in my heart. I repeated my request that he would give me an account of
the city; and, replying, I hear and obey, he thus addressed me:--



Know that this city belonged to my father and his family and subjects;
and he is the King whom thou hast seen converted into stone; and the
Queen whom thou hast seen is my mother. They were all Magians,
worshipping fire in the place of the Almighty King; and
they swore by the fire and the light, and the shade and the heat, and
the revolving orb. My father had no son, till, in his declining years,
he was blest with me, whom he reared until I attained to manhood. But,
happily for me, there was, in our family, an old woman, far advanced in
age, who was a Muslimeh, believing in God and his Apostle in her heart,
though she conformed with my family in outward observances; and my
father confided in her, on account of the faithfulness and modesty that
he had observed in her character, and shewed her great favour, firmly
believing that she held the same faith as himself; therefore, when I had
passed my infancy, he committed me to her care, saying, Take him, and
rear him, and instruct him in the ordinances of our faith, and educate
him and serve him in the best manner. The old woman accordingly received
me, but took care to instruct me in the faith of El-Islam, teaching me
the laws of purification, and the divine ordinances of ablution,
together with the forms of prayer; after which she made me commit to
memory the whole of the ur-an. She then charged me to keep my faith a
secret from my father, lest he should kill me; and I did so; and a few
days after, the old woman died. The inhabitants of the city had now
increased in their impiety and arrogance, and in their dereliction of
the truth; and while they were in this state, they heard a crier
proclaim with a voice like thunder, so as to be audible to both the near
and the distant, O inhabitants of this city, abstain from the worship of
fire, and worship the Almighty King!--The people were struck with
consternation, and, flocking to my father, the King of the city, said to
him, What is this alarming voice which hath astounded us by its terrible
sound?--but he answered them, Let not the voice terrify you, nor let it
turn you from your faith:--and their hearts inclined to his words; so
they persevered in the worship of fire, and remained obstinate in their
impiety during another year, until the return of the period at which
they had heard the voice the first time. It was then heard a second
time; and again, in the next year, they heard it a third time; but still
they persisted in their evil ways, until, drawing down upon themselves
the abhorrence and indignation of Heaven, one morning, shortly after
daybreak, they were converted into black stones, together with their
beasts and all their cattle. Not one of the inhabitants of the city
escaped, excepting me; and from the day on which this catastrophe
happened, I have continued occupied as thou seest, in prayer, and
fasting, and reading the ur-an: but I have become weary of this
solitary state, having no one to cheer me with his company.

On hearing these words, I said to him, Wilt thou go with me to the city
of Baghdad, and visit its learned men and lawyers, and increase thy
knowledge? If so, I will be thy handmaid, though I am the mistress of my
family, and have authority over a household of men. I have here a ship
laden with merchandise, and destiny hath driven us to this city, in
order that we might become acquainted with these events: our meeting was
predestined.--In this manner I continued to persuade him until he gave
his consent. I slept that night at his feet, unconscious of my state
through excessive joy; and in the morning we rose, and, entering the
treasuries, took away a quantity of the lighter and most valuable of the
articles that they contained, and descended from the citadel into the
city, where we met the slaves and the captain, who were searching for
me. They were rejoiced at seeing me, and, to their questions respecting
my absence, I replied by informing them of all that I had seen, and
related to them the history of the young man, and the cause of the
transmutation of the people of the city, and of all that had befallen
them, which filled them with wonder. But when my two sisters saw me with
the young man, they envied me on his account, and malevolently plotted
against me.

We embarked again, and I experienced the utmost happiness, chiefly owing
to the company of the young man; and after we had waited a while till
the wind was favourable, we spread our sails, and departed. My sisters
sat with me and the young man; and, in their conversation with me, said,
O our sister, what dost thou purpose to do with this handsome youth? I
answered, I desire to take him as my husband:--and, turning to him, and
approaching him, I said, O my master, I wish to make a proposal to thee,
and do not thou oppose it. He replied, I hear and obey:--and I then
looked towards my sisters, and said to them, This young man is all that
I desire, and all the wealth that is here is yours.--Excellent, they
replied, is thy determination:--yet still they designed evil against
me.--We continued our voyage with a favourable wind, and, quitting the
sea of peril, entered the sea of security, across which we proceeded for
some days, until we drew near to the city of El-Barah, the buildings of
which loomed before us at the approach of evening; but as soon as we had
fallen asleep, my sisters took us up in our bed, both myself and the
young man, and threw us into the sea. The youth, being unable to swim,
was drowned: God recorded him among the company of the martyrs;
while I was registered among those whose life was yet to be preserved;
and, accordingly, as soon as I awoke and found myself in the sea, the
providence of God supplied me with a piece of timber, upon which I
placed myself, and the waves cast me upon the shore of an island.



During the remainder of the night I walked along this island, and in the
morning I saw a neck of land, bearing the marks of a man's feet, and
uniting with the main land. The sun having now risen, I dried my clothes
in its rays, and proceeded along the path that I had discovered until I
drew near to the shore upon which stands the city, when I beheld a snake
approaching me, and followed by a serpent which was endeavouring to
destroy it; the tongue of the snake was hanging from its mouth in
consequence of excessive fatigue, and it excited my compassion; so I
took up a stone, and threw it at the head of the serpent, which
instantly died: the snake then extended a pair of wings, and soared
aloft into the sky, leaving me in wonder at the sight. At the time of
this occurrence I had become so fatigued, that I now laid myself down
and slept; but I awoke after a little while, and found a damsel seated
at my feet, and gently rubbing them with her hands; upon which I
immediately sat up, feeling ashamed that she should perform this service
for me, and said to her, Who art thou, and what dost thou want?--How
soon has thou forgotten me! she exclaimed: I am she to whom thou hast
just done a kindness, by killing my enemy: I am the snake whom thou
savedst from the serpent; for I am a Jinneeyeh, and the serpent was a
Jinnee at enmity with me; and none but thou delivered me from him:
therefore, as soon as thou didst this, I flew to the ship from which thy
sisters cast thee, and transported all that it contained to thy house: I
then sunk it; but as to thy sisters, I transformed them by enchantment
into two black bitches; for I knew all that they had done to thee: the
young man, however, is drowned.--Having thus said, she took me up, and
placed me with the two black bitches on the roof of my house: and I
found all the treasures that the ship had contained collected in the
midst of my house: nothing was lost. She then said to me, I swear by
that which was engraved upon the seal of Suleyman, that, if thou do not
inflict three hundred lashes upon each of these bitches every day, I
will come and transform thee in the like manner:--so I replied, I hear
and obey:--and have continued ever since to inflict upon them these
stripes, though pitying them while I do so.

The Khaleefeh heard this story with astonishment, and then said to the
second lady, And what occasioned the stripes of which thou bearest the
marks? She answered as follows:--


THE STORY OF THE SECOND OF THE THREE LADIES OF BAGHDAD.

O Prince of the Faithful, my father, at his death, left considerable
property; and soon after that event I married to one of the wealthiest
men of the age, who, when I had lived with him a year, died, and I
inherited from him eighty thousand pieces of gold, the portion that fell
to me according to the law; with part of which I made for
myself ten suits of clothing, each of the value of a thousand pieces of
gold. And as I was sitting one day, there entered my apartment an old
woman, disgustingly ugly, who saluted me, and said, I have an orphan
daughter whose marriage I am to celebrate this night, and I would have
thee obtain a reward and recompense in heaven by thy being present at
her nuptial festivity; for she is broken-hearted, having none to
befriend her but God, whose name be exalted. She then wept, and kissed
my feet; and, being moved with pity and compassion, I assented, upon
which she desired me to prepare myself, telling me that she would come
at the hour of nightfall and take me; and so saying, she kissed my hand,
and departed.

I arose immediately, and attired myself, and when I had completed my
preparations, the old woman returned, saying, O my mistress, the ladies
of the city have arrived, and I have informed them of thy coming, and
they are waiting with joy to receive thee:--so I put on my outer
garments, and, taking my female slaves with me, proceeded until we
arrived at a street in which a soft wind was delightfully playing, where
we saw a gateway over-arched with a marble vault, admirably constructed,
forming the entrance to a palace which rose from the earth to the
clouds. On our arrival there, the old woman knocked at the
door, and, when it was opened, we entered a carpeted passage,
illuminated by lamps and candles, and decorated with jewels and precious
metals. Through this passage we passed into a saloon of
unequalled magnificence, furnished with mattresses covered with silk,
lighted by hanging lamps and by candles, and having, at its upper end, a
couch of alabaster decorated with pearls and jewels, and canopied by
curtains of satin, from which there came forth a lady beautiful as the
moon, who exclaimed to me, Most welcome art thou, O my sister: thou
delightest me by thy company, and refreshest my heart. She then sat down
again, and said to me, O my sister, I have a brother who hath seen thee
at a festivity: he is a young man, more handsome than myself, and, his
heart being violently inflamed with love of thee, he hath bribed this
old woman to go to thee, and to employ this artifice in order to obtain
for me an interview with thee. He desireth to marry thee according to
the ordinance of God and his Apostle, and in that which is lawful there
is no disgrace.--When I heard these words, and saw myself thus confined
in the house so that I could not escape, I replied, I hear and
obey:--and the lady, rejoicing at my consent, clapped her hands, and
opened a door, upon which there came out from it a young man so
surpassingly handsome, that my heart immediately inclined to him. No
sooner had he sat down than the aee and four witnesses entered, and
saluted us, and proceeded to perform the ceremony of the
marriage-contract between me and the young man; which
having done, they departed; and when they had retired, the young man
looked towards me, and said, May our night be blessed. He then informed
me that he desired to impose a covenant upon me, and, bringing a copy of
the ur-an, said, Swear that thou wilt not indulge a preference, nor at
all incline, to any man but me:--and when I had sworn to this effect, he
rejoiced exceedingly, and embraced me; and the love of him took entire
possession of my heart.

We lived together in the utmost happiness for the space of a month,
after which I begged that he would allow me to go to the bazar, in order
to purchase some stuffs for dress, and, having obtained his permission,
went thither in company with the old woman, and seated myself at the
shop of a young merchant with whom she was acquainted, and whose father,
as she informed me, had died and left him great wealth. She desired him
to shew me his most costly stuffs; and while he was occupied in doing
so, she began to utter various flattering expressions in praise of him;
but I said to her, We have no concern with the praises that thou
bestowest upon him; we desire only to make our purchase, and to return
home. Meanwhile he produced to us what we wanted, and we handed him the
money: he refused, however, to take it, saying, It is an offering of
hospitality to you for your visit this day:--whereupon I said to the old
woman, If he will not take the money, return to him his stuff. But he
would not receive it again, and exclaimed, By Allah, I will take nothing
from you: all this is a present from me for a single kiss, which I shall
value more than the entire contents of my shop.--What will a kiss profit
thee? asked the old woman. Then, turning to me, she said, O my daughter,
thou hast heard what the youth hath said: no harm will befall thee if he
give thee a kiss, and thou shalt take what thou wantest.--Dost thou not
know, said I, that I have taken an oath? She answered, Let him kiss thee
then without thy speaking, and so it will be of no consequence to thee,
and thou shalt take back thy money. Thus she continued to palliate the
matter until I put my head (as it were) into the bag, and consented: so
I covered my eyes, and held the edge of my veil in such a manner as to
prevent the passengers from seeing me, whereupon he put his mouth to my
cheek beneath the veil, but instead of merely kissing me, he lacerated
my cheek by a violent bite. I fell into a swoon from the pain, and the
old woman laid me on her lap till I recovered, when I found the shop
closed, and the old woman uttering expressions of grief, and saying,
What God hath averted would have been a greater calamity; let us return
home, and do thou feign to be ill, and I will come to thee and apply a
remedy that shall cure the wound, and thou wilt quickly be restored.



After remaining there some time longer, I rose, and, in a state of great
uneasiness and fear, returned to the house, and professed myself ill,
upon which my husband came in to me, and said, What hath befallen thee,
O my mistress, during this excursion? I answered, I am not well.--And
what is this wound, said he, that is upon thy cheek, and in the soft
part? I answered, When I asked thy permission, and went out to-day to
purchase some stuff for dress, a camel loaded with firewood drove
against me in the crowd, and tore my veil, and wounded my cheek as thou
seest, for the streets of this city are narrow.--To-morrow,
then, he exclaimed, I will go to the governor, and make a complaint to
him, and he shall hang every seller of firewood in the city.--By Allah,
said I, burden not thyself by an injury to any one; for the truth is,
that I was riding upon an ass, which took fright with me, and I fell
upon the ground, and a stick lacerated my cheek.--If it be so, then, he
replied, I will go to-morrow to Jaafar El-Barmekee, and relate the
matter to him, and he shall kill every ass-driver in this city.--Wilt
thou, said I, kill all those men on my account, when this which befell
me was decreed by God?--Undoubtedly, he answered; and, so saying, he
seized me violently, and then sprang up, and uttered a loud cry, upon
which the door opened, and there came forth from it seven black slaves,
who dragged me from my bed, and threw me down in the middle of the
apartment; whereupon he ordered one of them to hold me by my shoulders
and to sit upon my head; and another, to sit upon my knees and to hold
my feet. A third then came, with a sword in his hand, and said, O my
lord, shall I strike her with the sword, and cleave her in twain, that
each of these may take a half and throw it into the Tigris for the fish
to devour? For such is the punishment of her who is
unfaithful to her oath and to the laws of love.--My husband answered,
Strike her, O Saad:--and the slave, with the drawn sword in
his hand, said, Repeat the profession of the faith, and reflect what
thou wouldst have to be done, that thou mayest give thy testamentary
directions, for this is the end of thy life.--Good slave, I replied,
release me for a while that I may do so:--and I raised my head, and,
weeping as I spoke, addressed my husband with these verses:--

  You render me lovelorn, and remain at ease. You make my wounded
    eyelid to be restless, and you sleep.
  Your abode is between my heart and my eyes; and my heart will not
    relinquish you, nor my tears conceal my passion.
  You made a covenant with me that you would remain faithful;
    but when you had gained possession of my heart you deceived me.
  Will you not pity my love for you and my moaning? Have you yourself
    been secure from misfortunes?
  I conjure you, by Allah, if I die, that you write upon my tombstone,
    This was a slave of love.
  That, perchance, some mourner who hath felt the same flame may pass
    by the lover's grave, and pity her.

But on hearing these verses, and witnessing my weeping, he became more
incensed, and replied in the words of this couplet:--

  I reject not the beloved of my heart from weariness: her own guilty
    conduct is the cause of her punishment.
  She desired that another should share with me her love; but the faith
    of my heart inclineth not to partnership.



I continued to weep, and to endeavour to excite his compassion, saying
within myself, I will humble me before him, and address him with soft
words, that he may at least refrain from killing me, though he take all
that I possess;--but he cried out to the slave, Cleave her in twain; for
she is no longer of any value to us.--So the slave approached me, and I
now felt assured of my death, and committed myself to God; but suddenly
the old woman came and threw herself at my husband's feet, and, kissing
them, exclaimed, O my son, by the care with which I nursed thee, I
conjure thee to pardon this damsel, for she hath committed no offence
that deserveth such a punishment: thou art young, and I fear the effect
of the imprecations that she may utter against thee:--and after she had
thus addressed him, she wept, and continued to importune him, until, at
length, he said, I pardon her, but must cause her to bear upon her
person such marks of her offence as shall last for the remainder of her
life. So saying, he commanded the slaves to strip off my vest, and,
taking a stick cut from a quince-tree, he beat me upon my back and my
sides until I became insensible from the violence of the blows, and
despaired of my life. He then ordered the slaves to take me away as soon
as it was night, accompanied by the old woman, and to throw me into my
house in which I formerly resided. They accordingly executed their
lord's commands, and when they had deposited me in my house, I applied
myself to the healing of my wounds; but, after I had cured myself, my
sides still bore the appearance of having been beaten with mira'ahs. I
continued to apply remedies for four months before I was restored, and
then repaired to view the house in which this event had happened; but I
found it reduced to ruin, and the whole street pulled down; the site of
the house I found occupied by mounds of rubbish, and I knew not the
cause.

Under these circumstances, I went to reside with this my sister, who is
of the same father as myself, and I found with her these two bitches.
Having saluted her, I informed her of all that had befallen me; to which
she replied, Who is secure from the afflictions of fortune? Praise be to
God who terminated the affair with safety to thy life!--She then related
to me her own story, and that of her two sisters, and I remained with
her, and neither of us ever mentioned the subject of marriage.
Afterwards we were joined by this our other sister, the cateress, who
every day goes out to purchase for us whatever we happen to want.


CONCLUSION OF THE STORY OF THE LADIES OF BAGHDAD, &c.

The Kaleefeh was astonished at this story, and ordered it to be recorded
in a book, as an authentic history, and deposited the book in his
library. And he said to the first lady, Knowest thou where the
Jinneeyeh who enchanted thy sisters is to be found? She
answered, O Prince of the Faithful, she gave me a lock of her hair, and
said, When thou desirest my presence, burn a few of these hairs, and I
will be with thee quickly, though I should be beyond Mount af.--Bring
then the hair, said the Khaleefeh. The lady, therefore, produced it; and
the Khaleefeh, taking it, burned a portion of it, and, when the odour
had diffused itself, the palace shook, and they heard a sound of
thunder, and lo, the Jinneeyeh appeared before them. She was a Muslimeh,
and therefore greeted the Khaleefeh by saying, Peace be on thee, O
Khaleefeh of God!--to which he replied, On you be peace, and the mercy
of God, and his blessings!--She then said, Know that this
lady hath conferred on me a benefit for which I am unable to requite
her; for she rescued me from death, by killing my enemy; and I, having
seen what her sisters had done to her, determined to take vengeance upon
them; therefore I transformed them by enchantment into two bitches; and,
indeed, I had wished rather to kill them, fearing lest they should
trouble her; but now, if thou desire their restoration, O Prince of the
Faithful, I will restore them, as a favour to thee and to her; for I am
one of the true believers.--Do so, said the Khaleefeh; and then we will
enter upon the consideration of the affair of the lady who hath been
beaten, and examine her case, and if her veracity be established, I will
take vengeance for her upon him who hath oppressed her. The Jinneeyeh
replied, O Prince of the Faithful, I will guide thee to the discovery of
him who acted thus to this lady, and oppressed her, and took her
property: he is thy nearest relation. She then took a cup of water, and,
having pronounced a spell over it, sprinkled the faces of the two
bitches, saying, Be restored to your original human forms!--whereupon
they became again two young ladies.--Extolled be the perfection of
their Creator! Having done this, the Jinneeyeh said, O
Prince of the Faithful, he who beat the lady is thy son El-Emeen, who
had heard of her beauty and loveliness:--and she proceeded to relate
what had happened. The Khaleefeh was astonished, and exclaimed, Praise
be to God for the restoration of these two bitches which hath been
effected through my means!--and immediately he summoned before him his
son El-Emeen, and inquired of him the history of the lady; and he
related to him the truth. He then sent for aees and witnesses, and the
first lady and her two sisters who had been transformed into bitches he
married to the three mendicants who had related that they were the sons
of Kings; and these he made chamberlains of his court, appointing them
all that they required, and allotting them apartments in the palace of
Baghdad. The lady who had been beaten he restored to his son El-Emeen,
giving her a large property, and ordering that the house should be
rebuilt in a more handsome style. Lastly, the lady-cateress he took as
his own wife; he admitted her at once to his own apartment, and, on the
following day, he appointed her a separate lodging for herself, with
female slaves to wait upon her: he also allotted to her a regular
income; and afterwards built for her a palace.