COMMENCING WITH PART OF THE THIRTY-SIXTH NIGHT, AND ENDING WITH PART OF
THE FORTY-FOURTH.

THE STORY OF GHANIM THE SON OF EIYOOB, THE DISTRACTED SLAVE OF LOVE.


It hath been told me, O happy King, said Shahrazad, that there was, in
ancient times, a certain merchant of Damascus, possessed of
wealth, who had a son like the moon at the full, of eloquent tongue,
called Ghanim the son of Eiyoob, the Distracted Slave of
Love; and this son had a sister, named Fitneh, on account of
her excessive beauty and loveliness. Their father died, leaving them
large property, among which were a hundred loads of silk and
brocade, and bags of musk, and upon these loads was written,
This is intended for Baghdad:--it having been his desire to journey to
that city.

So, when God (whose name be exalted!) had taken his soul, and some time
had elapsed, his son took these loads, and journeyed with them to
Baghdad.--This was in the time of Haroon Er-Rasheed.--He took leave of
his mother and relations and townspeople before his departure, and went
forth, placing his dependence upon God (whose name be exalted!), and God
decreed him safety, so that he arrived at Baghdad, whither there
travelled in his company a party of merchants. He hired for himself a
handsome house, and furnished it with carpets and cushions, and
suspended curtains in it; and there he deposited those loads, together
with the mules and camels, and remained until he had rested himself; and
the merchants of Baghdad, and its great men, came and saluted him. He
then took a wrapper containing ten pieces of costly stuff, with the
prices written upon them, and went forth with them to the market of the
merchants, who met him and saluted him, treated him with honour and
welcomed him, and seated him at the shop of the Sheykh of the market;
and he sold the pieces, gaining, for every piece of gold, two. So Ghanim
rejoiced; and he proceeded to sell the stuffs by little and little, and
continued to do so for a whole year.

After this, on the first day of the following year, he came to the same
market, but found its gate shut, and, inquiring the cause of this, he
was answered, One of the merchants hath died, and all the rest of them
have gone to walk in his funeral-procession. Wilt thou then, added his
informant, gain a recompense by walking with them?--He
replied, Yes;--and he asked respecting the place of the funeral. So they
guided him thither; and he performed the ablution, and
walked with the other merchants until they arrived at the place of
prayer, where they prayed over the dead. The merchants then walked all
together before the corpse to the burial-ground, Ghanim following them,
until the procession arrived at the burial-ground outside the city, and
they proceeded among the tombs until they came to that in which the
corpse was to be deposited. They found that the family of the deceased
had pitched a tent over the tomb, and placed there the candles and
lamps; and they buried the dead, and the readers sat reciting the ur-an
at the tomb. The merchants sat with them; and so also did Ghanim the son
of Eiyoob; but he was overcome by bashfulness, saying within himself, I
cannot quit them until I have departed with them. They sat listening to
the recitation of the ur-an until the period of nightfall, when the
servants placed before them the supper and sweetmeats, and they ate till
they were satisfied, and washed their hands, and resumed their seats.

The heart of Ghanim was now troubled with reflections upon his
merchandize, and he was fearful of the thieves, and said within himself,
I am a stranger, and suspected of possessing wealth, and if I pass the
night far away from my abode, the thieves will steal the money and the
loads. So, fearing for his property, he arose and went forth from among
the company, asking their leave to depart on account of some business
that he had to transact, and followed the beaten track until he came to
the gate of the city: but it was then midnight, and he found the gate of
the city shut, and saw no one coming or going, and heard not a sound
save the barking of the dogs, and the howling of the wolves; whereupon
he exclaimed, There is no strength nor power but in God! I was in fear
for my property, and came hither on account of it, and have found the
gate shut, and now I have become in fear for my life!--He then returned
to seek for himself a place in which to sleep until the morning: and,
finding a private burial-place enclosed by four walls, with a palm-tree
within it, and a gate-way of hard stone, open, he entered it, and
desired to sleep; but sleep came not to him.

Tremor and gloom overcame him, thus lying among the tombs, and he rose
upon his feet, and, opening the door, looked out, and beheld a light
gleaming in the distance in the direction of the city-gate. He advanced a
few steps, and saw the light approaching in the way which led to the
burial-place in which he was taking refuge; whereupon Ghanim feared for
himself, and hastily closed the door, and climbed up into the palm-tree,
and concealed himself in the midst of its branches. The light continued
to approach the tomb by little and little until it came very near; and
as he looked attentively at it, he perceived three black slaves, two of
whom were bearing a chest, the other having in his hand an adze and a
lantern; and as they drew near, one of the two slaves who were bearing
the chest said, What aileth thee, O awab?--to which the
other of the two replied, What aileth thee, O Kafoor? The
former rejoined, Were we not here at the hour of nightfall, and did we
not leave the door open?--Yes, answered the other: what thou sayest is
true.--See then, resumed the first speaker, it is shut and barred.--Upon
this, the third, who was carrying the adze and light, and whose name was
Bakheet, said, How small is your sense! Know ye not that
the owners of the gardens go forth from Baghdad and repair hither, and,
evening overtaking them, enter this place, and shut the door upon
themselves, through fear, lest the blacks, like ourselves, should take
them and roast them and eat them?--Thou hast spoken truth,
they answered; but there is none among us of less sense than
thyself.--Verily, he replied, ye will not believe me until we enter the
burial-place and find some one in it: and I imagine that, if any one be
in it, and have seen the light, he hath betaken himself to the top of
the palm-tree.



When Ghanim heard these words of the slave, he said within himself, How
cunning is this slave! May Allah disgrace the blacks for their malice
and villainy! There is no strength nor power but in God, the High, the
Great! What will deliver me from this difficulty?--The two who were
bearing the chest then said to him who had the adze, Climb over the
wall, and open to us the door, O Bakheet; for we are fatigued with
carrying the chest upon our necks: and if thou open to us the door, we
will give thee one of the persons whom we take, and we will fry him for
thee excellently, so that not a drop of his fat shall be lost. But he
replied, I am afraid of a thing that my little sense hath suggested to
me: let us throw over the chest behind the door; for it is our deposite.
They said to him, If we throw it, it will break.--I am afraid, he
rejoined, that there may be, within the tomb, robbers who slay men and
steal their property; for when evening overtaketh them they enter these
places to divide what they have taken.--O thou of little sense,
exclaimed the two others; can they enter here?--They then put down the
chest, and climbed up the wall, and descended, and opened the door,
while the third slave, Bakheet, stood waiting for them with the light,
and a basket containing some plaster: after which they seated
themselves, having closed the door; and one of them said, O my brother,
we are tired with walking and taking up and putting down, and opening
the door and shutting it, and it is now midnight, and we have not
strength remaining to open the tomb and to bury the chest; wherefore we
will sit here three hours to rest ourselves, and then rise and
accomplish our business: but each of us shall in the mean time tell his
story, and relate all that hath happened to him from beginning to end.
So the first, who carried the light, told his story; but it was of a
nature unfit to be here repeated; after which, another of
the slaves thus began.


THE STORY OF THE SLAVE KAFOOR.

Know, O my brothers, that I was, at the commencement of my career, a boy
of eight years, and I used to tell one lie to the slave-merchants every
year, so that they fell out with each other in consequence, and the
slave-merchant my master, becoming impatient of me, committed me to the
broker, desiring him to cry, Who will buy this slave with his fault? He
was therefore asked, What is his fault?--and answered, He telleth one
lie every year. And a merchant approached the broker, and said to him,
How much have they bidden for this slave with his fault? He answered,
They have bidden six hundred pieces of silver.--Then thou shalt have
twenty for thyself, replied the merchant. So the broker introduced him
to the slave-merchant, who received from him the money, and the broker
conveyed me to the dwelling of the merchant, and took his brokerage.

The merchant clad me in a dress suitable to my condition, and I
continued with him for the remainder of the year, until the new year
commenced with prosperity. It was a blessed year, plenteous in the
produce of the earth, and the merchants began to give entertainments,
every day one taking his turn to do so, until it was my master's turn to
give an entertainment in a garden within the city. So he went, and the
other merchants also, and he took for them what they required of food
and other provisions, and they sat eating and drinking and carousing
till noon, when my master wanted something from the house, and said, O
slave, mount the mule, and go to the house, and bring, from thy
mistress, such a thing, and return quickly.

I obeyed, therefore, and went to the house; but when I approached it, I
shrieked out, and shed tears; whereupon the people of the quarter
assembled together, old and young; and my master's wife and daughters,
hearing my cry, opened the door, and asked me what was the matter. I
answered them, My master was sitting beneath an old wall, he and his
friends, and it fell upon them; and when I beheld what happened to them,
I mounted the mule, and came in haste to inform you. And when his
children and wife heard these words, they shrieked, and tore their
clothes, and slapped their faces, and the neighbours came to them. Then
my master's wife overturned the furniture of the house, one thing upon
another, and pulled down its shelves, and broke its shutters and its
windows, and smeared its walls with mud and indigo, and said to me, Wo
to thee, O Kafoor! Come hither and help me, and demolish these
cupboards, and smash these vessels and this China-ware.--So I went to
her, and destroyed with her the shelves of the house and all that was
upon them, and its cupboards and what they contained, and went about
over the terraces and through every place until I had laid waste the
whole, crying all the while, Oh my master! My mistress then went forth,
with her face uncovered, and only with her head-veil, and the girls and
boys went with her, saying to me, O Kafoor, walk on before us, and shew
us the place where thy master lieth dead beneath the wall, that we may
take him forth from under the ruins, and carry him in a bier, and bring
him to the house, and convey his corpse in a handsome manner to the
burial. So I walked before them, crying, Oh my master!--and they
followed me with their faces and heads uncovered, crying,
Oh our misfortune! Oh our calamity!--and there was none among the men,
nor among the women, nor among the children, nor a maiden, nor an old
woman,  who did not accompany us; and all of them
slapped themselves in the excess of their lamentation. Thus I went with
them through the city; and the people asking the news, they informed
them of that which they had heard from me; and the people exclaimed,
There is no strength nor power but in God, the High, the Great! We will
go to the Walee, and acquaint him.--And when they arrived before the
Walee, they informed him; and he mounted, and took with him labourers
with axes and baskets, and they followed my footsteps, accompanied by a
crowd of people.

I preceded them, weeping and crying out, and throwing dust upon my head,
and slapping my face; and when I came to the party in the garden, and my
master beheld me, I slapped my face, and exclaimed, Oh my mistress! who
will have pity upon me after my mistress? Would that I had been her
sacrifice!--When my master, therefore, saw me, he was confounded, his
countenance became pale, and he said, What aileth thee, O Kafoor, and
what is this predicament, and what is the news? I answered him, When
thou sentest me to the house to bring thee what thou wantedst, I went
thither and entered the house, and found that the wall of the saloon had
fallen, and that the whole saloon had tumbled down upon my mistress and
her children.--And did not thy mistress, said he, escape? I answered,
No: not one of them escaped; and the first of them that died was my
mistress the elder.--But did my youngest daughter escape? he asked. I
answered, No.--And what, said he, hath become of the mule that I ride:
is she safe?--No, O my master, I answered: for the walls of the house
and the walls of the stable tumbled down upon all that was in the house;
even upon the sheep and the geese and the hens, and all of them became a
mass of flesh beneath the ruins; not one of them escaped. He then said
to me, And thy master the elder? I answered, No: not one escaped; and
now there remains neither house nor inhabitant, nor any trace of them;
and as to the sheep and the geese and the hens, the cats and dogs have
now eaten them.--And when my master heard my words, the light became
darkness before his face, and he was no longer master of his senses nor
of his reason, and was unable to stand upon his feet: he was paralyzed,
and the strength of his back failed him, and he rent his clothes and
plucked his beard and slapped his face and threw his turban from his
head, and ceased not to slap his face until the blood flowed from it:
and he began to cry, Ah! Oh my children! Ah! Oh my wife! Ah! Oh my
misfortune! Unto whom hath happened the like of that which hath happened
to me?--The merchants, also, his companions, joined with him in cries
and lamentations, and were moved with pity for his case, and rent their
clothes; and my master went forth from the garden, beating himself for
the calamity that had  befallen him, and redoubled the
blows upon his face, seeming as though he were drunk.

And as the party thus went out from the gate of the garden, they beheld
a great dust, and heard tumultuous cries, and, looking in that
direction, saw the crowd approaching them. This crowd was the Walee and
his attendants, and a concourse of people who had come to gratify their
curiosity, with the merchant's family behind them, shrieking and crying
with violent lamentation and excessive grief; and the first who accosted
my master were his wife and children. On beholding these, he was
confounded, and laughed, and said to them, How are ye; and what hath
happened to you in the house, and what hath befallen you? And when they
saw him, they exclaimed, Praise be to God for thy safety! And they threw
themselves upon him, and his children clung to him, crying out, Oh our
father! Praise be to God for thy safety, O our father!--and his wife
said to him, Praise be to God who hath shewn us thy face in safety!--and
she was stupified, and her reason fled from her at that which she
beheld. She then said to him, How didst thou escape with thy
friends?--And how, said he, were ye in the house?--We were all well,
they answered, in prosperity and health, and no evil hath befallen our
house, save that thy slave Kafoor came to us with his head uncovered and
his clothes rent, crying out, Oh my master! Oh my master!--and we said
to him, What is the matter, O Kafoor?--and he answered, My master was
sitting under a wall in the garden, and it fell upon him, and he
died.--By Allah, replied my master, he came to me just now, crying, Oh
my mistress! Oh the children of my mistress!--and said, My mistress and
her children are all dead!



He then looked aside, and, seeing me with my turban falling from my
head, while I still cried out and wept violently and threw dust upon my
head, he called out to me: so I approached him, and he said to me, Wo to
thee! O malevolent slave! O misbegotten wretch! O thou of accursed race!
What events hast thou brought about! But, by Allah, I will strip off
thy skin from thy flesh, and cut thy flesh from thy bones!--By Allah,
replied I, thou canst not do to me anything; for thou boughtest me with
my fault, on this condition, the witnesses testifying that thou
boughtest me with my fault, thou knowing it, and it was, that I was
accustomed to tell one lie every year; and this is but half a lie, and
when the year is complete I will tell the other half of it; so it will
be an entire lie. But upon this, he cried out at me, O most accursed of
slaves! is this but half a lie? Nay, it is an exceeding calamity! Depart
from me; for thou art free!--By Allah, I replied, if thou
liberate me, I will not liberate thee until the year be complete, and I
tell the remaining half of the lie; and when I have completed it, then
take me to the market, and sell me as thou boughtest me with my fault,
and liberate me not; for I have no trade by means of which to procure my
subsistence: this is a legal proposition that I have stated to thee,
laid down by the lawyers in the Chapter of Emancipation.--While
we were thus talking, the crowd approached, with the people of the
quarter, women and men, come to mourn, and the Walee with his
attendants: and my master and the other merchants went to the Walee,
and acquainted him with the case, and that this was but half a lie; and
when the people who were present heard this, they were astonished at
this lie, and struck with the utmost wonder; and they cursed and
reviled me; while I stood laughing, and saying, How can my master kill
me when he bought me with this fault?

So when my master went to the house, he found it in a state of ruin (and
it was I who destroyed the greater part, and broke in it things worth a
large sum of money); and his wife said to him, It was Kafoor who broke
the vessels and the China-ware. Upon this, his rage increased, and he
exclaimed, By Allah! in my life I have never seen such a misbegotten
wretch as this slave; yet he calleth it half a lie! What then would have
been the result had it been a whole lie! In that case he had destroyed a
city, or two cities!--Then, in the excess of his rage, he went to the
Walee, who inflicted upon me a severe beating, so that I became
insensible, and swooned away; after which, my master contrived means of
obtaining for me a high price, and I ceased not to excite disturbances
in the places into which I was sold, and was transferred from Emeer to
Emeer and from Grandee to Grandee, by sale and purchase, until I entered
the palace of the Prince of the Faithful, and now my spirit is broken,
and my strength hath failed.


CONTINUATION OF THE STORY OF GHANIM THE SON OF EIYOOB, THE DISTRACTED
SLAVE OF LOVE.

When the other slaves had heard his story, they laughed at it, and said
to him, Verily thou art a villain, the son of a villain: thou hast told
an abominable lie. The first and second then said to the third slave,
Relate to us thy story.--O sons of my uncle, he replied, all that hath
just been related is nonsense: but my story is long, and this is not a
time to tell it; for the morning, O sons of my uncle, is near, and
perhaps it may overtake us with this chest still before us, and we shall
be disgraced among the public, and our lives will be lost; haste then to
work, and when we have finished, and returned home, I will relate to you
my story. So they put down the light, and dug a trench of the size of
the chest between four tombs; Kafoor digging, and awab removing the
earth in baskets, until they had dug to the depth of half a fathom, when
they put the chest into the trench, and replaced the earth over it, and
went forth from the enclosure, and, having closed the gate, disappeared
from before the eyes of Ghanim the son of Eiyoob.

When, therefore, they had left the place vacant unto Ghanim, and he knew
that he was alone, his mind became busied respecting the contents of the
chest, and he said within himself, What can this chest contain? He
waited until daybreak gleamed and shone forth, and then descended from
the palm-tree, and removed the earth with his hand until he had
uncovered the chest and disengaged it, when he took a stone, and struck
with it the lock, and broke it; and lifting up the cover, he looked in,
and beheld a sleeping damsel, stupified with benj, but
still breathing: she was of beautiful and lovely person, and decked with
ornaments of gold, and necklaces of jewels, worth a kingdom, and of a
value that no money would equal. When Ghanim the son of Eiyoob beheld
her, he knew that she had been the object of a plot, and, being
convinced of this, he pulled her up until he had lifted her out of the
chest, and laid her upon her back; and as soon as she scented the
breeze, and the air entered her nostrils and her mouth and throat, she
sneezed, and then was choked, and coughed, whereupon there fell from her
throat a round piece of benj, of such potency that if an elephant smelt
it he would sleep from one night to another. She then opened her eyes,
and, looking round, said, with an eloquent voice, Wo to thee, O wind!
Thou neither satisfiest the thirsty, nor cheerest by thy presence the
satisfied with drink! Where is Zahr-el-Bustan?--But no one answered her.
Then looking aside, she exclaimed, abeeah! Shejeret-ed-Durr!
Noor-el-Huda! Nejmet-e-ub! Art thou awake? Nuzheh!
ulweh! areefeh! Speak ye!--But no one answered her. And she looked
round about her, and exclaimed, Alas for me, that I am transported to
the tombs! O Thou who knowest the secrets of the breasts, and
recompensest on the day of resurrection! who hath brought me from among
the curtains and the veils, and placed me amid four tombs?



While she was saying all this, Ghanim stood still; but he now said to
her, O my mistress, there are neither veils nor palaces nor tombs for
thee here: this is none other than thy slave Ghanim the son of Eiyoob,
whom the King who is omniscient with respect to hidden things hath
impelled hither that he may deliver thee from these troubles, and that
the utmost of thy desires may be accomplished unto thee.--And he was
silent; and when she became convinced of the truth of the case, she
exclaimed, I testify that there is no deity but God, and I testify that
Moammad is God's Apostle! Then looking towards Ghanim, with her hands
placed upon her breast, she said to him, with a sweet voice, O
auspicious youth, who brought me unto this place? For now I have
recovered my senses.--O my mistress, he answered, three eunuchs came
bearing this chest:--and he related to her all that had happened, and
how the evening had overtaken him, so that he became the means of her
preservation, and that otherwise she had died of suffocation; and he
inquired of her respecting her history.--O youth, she replied, praise be
to God who hath cast me into the hands of one like thee! Rise therefore
now, and put me into the chest, and go forth to the road, and as soon as
thou shalt find any one who lets out asses or other beasts, or a
muleteer, hire him to transport this chest, and convey me to thy house;
and when I am in thy abode it will be well, and I will relate to thee my
story, and acquaint thee with my tale, and good fortune will accrue to
thee through my means.--So Ghanim rejoiced, and he went forth into the
desert tract.

The day had begun to gleam, the sun rose in splendour, and the people
come walking forth; and Ghanim hired a man with a mule, and brought him
to the burial-place. He then lifted the chest, after he had put the
damsel into it, and, with his heart smitten by love for her, proceeded
with her, full of joy, for she was a damsel worth ten thousand pieces of
gold, and was decked with ornaments and apparel of enormous value.
Scarcely had he found himself at his house when he put down the chest,
and opened it, and took forth from it the damsel, who looked, and saw
that the place was a handsome dwelling furnished with variegated
carpets, and she observed the gay colours and various embellishments,
and beheld stuffs packed up, and loads of goods, and other property: so
she knew that he was a great merchant, and a man of wealth. She then
uncovered her face, and looked at him, and observed him to be a handsome
young man, and loved him; and she said to him, Bring us something to
eat. He answered her, On the head and the eye be thy commands:--and went
to the market, and bought a roasted lamb, and a dish of sweetmeat, and
procured some dried fruits, and candles and wine, and the requisite
apparatus for perfumes. Then returning to the house, he took in the
things, and when the damsel saw him, she laughed, and kissed him, and
embraced him, and began to caress him, so that the love which he felt
increased, and took entire possession of his heart. They then ate and
drank until the approach of night, and their love was mutual: for they
were both of the same age, and both equal in comeliness; and when the
night approached, the Distracted Slave of Love, Ghanim the son of
Eiyoob, rose and lighted the candles and lamps, and the chamber
glistened: he then brought forth the wine-service, and prepared the
table, and sat down with her; he filling and handing to her, and she
filling and handing to him, while they both toyed and laughed and
recited verses: their gaiety increased, and they were engrossed by
mutual love.--Extolled be the perfection of the Uniter of Hearts!--Thus
they continued until it was near morning, when sleep overcame them, and
each of them slept apart from the other till morning came.

Ghanim the son of Eiyoob then arose, and went forth to the market, and
bought what was requisite of vegetables and meat and wine and other
provisions, and brought them to the house; and he again sat with her to
eat, and they ate until they were satisfied; after which he brought the
wine, and they drank and toyed together till their cheeks reddened and
their eyes became more intensely black; and Ghanim said, O
my mistress, have compassion on the captive of thy love, and him whom
thine eyes have slain. I had remained sound of heart but for thee.--Then
he wept a while; and she replied, O my master, and light of mine eye, By
Allah, I love thee and confide in thee; but I know that thou canst not
be united to me.--And what hindereth? said he. She answered, I will this
night relate to thee my story, that thou mayest accept my excuse. But
they continued thus a whole month; and after this, one night, when
Ghanim was complaining to her of his passion, she said to him, I will
now explain to thee my case, that thou mayest know my dignity, and that
my secret may be revealed to thee, and my excuse become manifest to
thee. He replied, Well. And she took hold of a band which confined a
part of her dress, and said to him, O my master, read what is on this
border. So he took the border in his hand, and looked at it, and found
worked upon it in gold, I am thine, and thou art mine, O descendant of
the Prophet's Uncle. And when he had read this, he let fall
his hand, and said to her, Reveal to me thy history. She answered,
Well:--and thus began:--

Know that I am a favourite slave of the Prince of the Faithful, and my
name is oot-el-uloob. The Prince of the Faithful, after
he had reared me in his palace, and I had grown up, observed my
qualities, and the beauty and loveliness with which my Lord had endowed
me, and loved me excessively: he took me and lodged me in a private
apartment, and appointed me ten female slaves to serve me, and then gave
me those ornaments which thou seest with me. After this, the Khaleefeh
went forth one day on a journey to one of the surrounding provinces, and
the lady Zubeydeh came to one of the female slaves who were in my
service, and said, When thy mistress oot-el-uloob sleepeth, put this
piece of benj into her nose and her drink, and thou shalt receive from
me a sum of money that will satisfy thee. The slave replied, Most
willingly:--and she received the benj from her, rejoicing on account of
the money, and because she had been originally Zubeydeh's slave; and she
insinuated the benj into me, whereupon I fell upon the floor, with my
head bent down to my feet, and seemed to be in another world. And when
she could devise no other stratagem, she put me into that chest, and
privily summoned the black slaves, and, after having given presents to
them and to the door-keepers, sent me with the black slaves on the night
when thou wast reposing at the top of the palm-tree: and they did with
me as thou sawest, and my deliverance was effected through thy means.
Then thou broughtest me unto this place, where thou hast treated me with
the utmost kindness. This is my story; and I know not what hath happened
to the Khaleefeh during my absence. Know, therefore, my dignity; and
divulge not my case.

When Ghanim the son of Eiyoob heard these words of oot-el-uloob, and
discovered that she was the favourite of the Khaleefeh, he drew back, in
his awe of the Khaleefeh, and sat alone at one side of the chamber,
blaming himself, and reflecting upon his situation, perplexed by love of
her to whom he could not be united; and he wept from the violence of his
desire, and the fierceness of his passion and distraction, and began to
complain of fortune and its injustice.--Extolled be the perfection of
Him who causeth the hearts of the generous to be troubled with love, and
endueth not the mean with so much of it as equalleth the weight of a
grain!--And upon this, oot-el-uloob rose to him, and embraced and
kissed him, and, her heart being entirely captivated by his love, she
revealed what she had hidden of the extent of her passion, and encircled
his neck with her arms, and kissed him again; but he withdrew from her
embrace, in his fear of the Khaleefeh. They then conversed a while,
drowned in the sea of mutual love, and so remained until day, when
Ghanim arose, and went forth to the market as usual, and procured what
was requisite, and, returning to the house, found oot-el-uloob
weeping: but as soon as she beheld him, she ceased from her tears, and
smiled, and said to him, Thou hast made me desolate by thine absence, O
beloved of my heart! By Allah, this hour during which thou hast been
away from me hath appeared as a year; for I cannot endure thy
separation; and see, I have thus shewn thee my state, through the
violence of my passion. Arise therefore now, and mind not what hath
happened, but take me as thy wife.--But he replied, I seek refuge with
Allah! This is a thing that cannot be. How should the dog sit in the
place of the lion? What belongeth to my lord is forbidden me to
approach.--He then tore himself from her, and sat apart; and she
increased in love through his refusal.--In this manner they passed three
long months; and whenever she made any advances to him he withdrew from
her, and said, Whatever belongeth to the master is forbidden to the
slave.--Such was the case of the Distracted Slave of Love, Ghanim the
son of Eiyoob.

Meanwhile, Zubeydeh, during the absence of the Khaleefeh, having acted
thus with oot-el-uloob, became perplexed, saying within herself, What
shall I say to the Khaleefeh when he cometh and inquireth respecting
her; and what shall be my answer to him? She then called for an old
woman who resided with her, and acquainted her with her secret, and said
to her, What shall I do, now that oot-el-uloob is no more? The old
woman answered, when she understood the affair, Know, O my mistress,
that the return of the Khaleefeh is near; but I will send to a
carpenter, and desire him to make a wooden image of a corpse, and they
shall dig for it a grave, and thou shalt light candles and lamps around
it, and command every one who is in the palace to wear black,
and order thy female slaves and eunuchs, as soon as they know of the
Khaleefeh's return from his journey, to raise lamentations in the
vestibules, and when he enters and asks the news, they shall answer him,
oot-el-uloob is dead; and may God abundantly compensate thee for the
loss of her!--and from the esteem with which she was regarded by our
mistress, she hath buried her in her own palace. So when he heareth
this, he will weep, and the event will distress him. Then he will cause
the readers to sit up by night at her tomb to perform recitations of the
ur-an: and if he say within himself, Surely the daughter of my uncle,
through her jealousy, hath been led to destroy oot-el-uloob,--or the
distraction of love overpower him, and he give orders to take her forth
from the tomb, fear not from that; for if they dig down to the image in
the form of a human being, and take it forth, shrouded in costly
grave-clothes, and the Khaleefeh desire to remove the grave-clothes from
it, to behold her, do thou prevent him, and the fear of the world to
come will withhold him; and do thou say to him, To behold her corpse
uncovered is unlawful. Then he will believe her death, and will return
her image to its place, and thank thee for thy conduct, and thou shalt
escape, if it please God, from this difficulty.--When the lady Zubeydeh,
therefore, heard what she said, she approved it, and bestowed upon her a
dress of honour, and commanded her to do this, having given her a sum of
money. So the old woman set about the business immediately, and ordered
the carpenter to make for her an image as above described; and when it
was finished, she brought it to the lady Zubeydeh, and she shrouded it,
and lighted the candles and lamps, and spread the carpets around the
tomb, and clad herself in black, ordering the female slaves to do the
same; and the news was spread through the palace, that oot-el-uloob
had died.



Some time after this, the Khaleefeh returned from his journey, and went
up to his palace; but his mind was occupied only with oot-el-uloob;
and seeing the pages and eunuchs and female slaves all clad in black,
his heart was agitated; and when he entered the palace of the lady
Zubeydeh, and beheld her also clad in black, he inquired the reason of
it, and they informed him of the death of oot-el-uloob. Upon hearing
this, he fell down in a swoon; and when he recovered, he asked where was
her tomb; and the lady Zubeydeh answered, Know, O Prince of the
Faithful, that, on account of the esteem in which she was held by me, I
buried her in my palace. So the Khaleefeh, entering the palace in his
travelling-dress, proceeded to visit the tomb of oot-el-uloob, and
found the carpets spread, and the candles and lamps lighted; and when he
beheld this, he thanked her for what she had done. But afterwards he
became perplexed, and wavered a while between belief and disbelief,
until suspicion overcame him, and he gave orders to open the tomb and to
take her out: when, however, he saw the grave-clothes, and was about to
remove them that he might behold her, he feared God (whose name be
exalted!), and the old woman said, Restore her to her place. Then
immediately the Khaleefeh commanded to bring the professors of religion
and law, and the readers, and they performed recitations of the whole of
the ur-an at her tomb, while he sat by the side of it weeping until he
became insensible.

He continued to frequent the tomb for the space of a month; after which
it happened that he entered the areem, after the emeers and wezeers had
dispersed from before him to their houses, and he slept a while, and a
female slave sat at his head, and another at his feet; and after sleep
had overcome him he awoke, and opened his eyes, and heard the damsel who
was at his head say to her who was at his feet, Wo to thee, O
Kheyzuran!--Wherefore, O aeeb? said the other.--Our lord,
rejoined the first, is ignorant of what hath happened; so he sitteth up
by night at a tomb in which there is nothing but a carved image, the
work of the carpenter.--And what then, asked the other damsel, hath
befallen oot-el-uloob? Her companion answered, Know that our mistress
Zubeydeh sent some benj by a female slave, and she stupified her with
it, and when the benj had taken effect upon her, she put her in a chest,
and sent her away with awab and Kafoor, commanding them to throw her
into the tomb. Upon this, Kheyzuran said, Wo to thee, O aeeb! Is not
the lady oot-el-uloob dead?--Heaven preserve her youth from death!
answered aeeb: I heard the lady Zubeydeh say that oot-el-uloob was
with a young merchant named Ghanim of Damascus, and that she had been
with him, including this day, four months; and our lord here weepeth and
passeth sleepless nights at a tomb in which there is no corpse.--Thus
they conversed together, while the Khaleefeh heard their words; and
when they had finished their conversation, and he had become acquainted
with the event, that this tomb was a false one, and that oot-el-uloob
had been with Ghanim the son of Eiyoob for the space of four months, he
was violently incensed, and arose, and summoned the emeers of his court;
whereupon the Wezeer Jaafar El-Barmekee presented himself and kissed the
ground before him, and the Khaleefeh said to him, in anger, Descend, O
Jaafar, with a body of men, and inquire for the house of Ghanim the son
of Eiyoob, and assault it suddenly, and bring him hither with my female
slave oot-el-uloob; and I will assuredly torture him.

Jaafar replied, I hear and obey;--and he went forth with his attendants,
the Walee also accompanying him, and they proceeded until they arrived
at Ghanim's house. Ghanim had just before gone out and brought a pot of
meat, and was about to stretch forth his hand to eat of it with
oot-el-uloob, when she looked out, and found that the house was beset
on all sides, and the Wezeer and the Walee and the officers of violence
and the memlooks with drawn swords were surrounding it as the black
surrounds the pupil of the eye; and upon this she knew that tidings of
her situation had reached the ears of the Khaleefeh her lord, and she
made sure of destruction; her countenance became pale, and her beauty
changed, and, looking towards Ghanim, she said to him, O my beloved,
save thyself!--How shall I do, said he, and whither shall I flee, when
my wealth and means of subsistence are in this house? But she answered,
Delay not, lest thou perish, and thy wealth also be lost.--O my
mistress, and light of mine eye, rejoined he, how can I contrive to go
forth when they are surrounding the house?--Fear not, she answered:--and
she pulled off his clothes, and clad him in worn-out, ragged garments,
and, taking the pot that had contained the meat, placed it upon his
head, and put in it a little bread and a saucer of meat, and said to
him, Go forth by the help of this stratagem, and thou hast nothing to
fear with respect to me, for I know what I am able to do with the
Khaleefeh. When Ghanim, therefore, heard the words of oot-el-uloob,
and the advice which she gave him, he went forth through the midst of
them, bearing the pot, and Providence protected him so that he escaped
from the snares and injuries which menaced him, by the blessing of his
good conscience.

And when the Wezeer Jaafar arrived at the house, he dismounted from his
horse, and entered, and looked at oot-el-uloob, who had adorned
herself, and filled a chest with gold and ornaments and jewels and
rarities, such as were light to carry and of great value; and when
Jaafar came in to her, she rose upon her feet, and kissed the ground
before him, saying to him, O my master, the Pen hath written what God
hath decreed. But Jaafar, when he beheld her situation,
replied, By Allah, O my mistress, he gave me no order but to arrest
Ghanim the son of Eiyoob. And she said, Know that he hath packed up some
bales of merchandise, and gone with them to Damascus, and I know nothing
more than this; and I request thee to take care of this chest for me,
and to convey it to the palace of the Prince of the Faithful. So Jaafar
answered, I hear and obey:--and he took the chest, and gave orders that
it should be conveyed, together with oot-el-uloob, to the palace of
the Khaleefeh, treating her with honour and respect. This took place
after they had plundered the house of Ghanim; and they went to the
Khaleefeh, and Jaafar related to him all that had happened; whereupon
the Khaleefeh appointed to oot-el-uloob a dark chamber, and there
lodged her, commissioning an old woman to serve her; for he imagined
that Ghanim had acted dishonestly towards her.

He then wrote a letter to the Emeer Moammad the son of Suleyman
Ez-Zeynee, who was viceroy of Damascus, containing as follows:--As soon
as this letter cometh to thy hands, thou shalt arrest Ghanim the son of
Eiyoob, and send him unto me.--So when the mandate was brought to him,
he kissed it, and put it upon his head, and caused it to be proclaimed
through the market-street, Whosoever desireth to plunder, let him repair
to the house of Ghanim the son of Eiyoob. And they came to the house,
and found that the mother of Ghanim, and his sister, had made for them a
tomb, and sat by it weeping; and they laid hold upon them, and plundered
the house, and the mother and sister knew not the cause: and when they
brought them before the Sulan, he inquired of them
respecting Ghanim the son of Eiyoob; and they answered him, For the
space of a year we have obtained no tidings of him.--And they restored
them to their place.



In the mean time, Ghanim the son of Eiyoob, the Distracted Slave of
Love, when his wealth had been seized, was perplexed, and began to weep
for himself so as to break his heart. He walked on, and ceased not on
his way to the close of day, suffering from excessive hunger and
fatigue, until he arrived at a village, where he entered a mosque, and
seated himself upon a round mat, and he leaned his back
against one of the walls of the building, and then threw himself down,
under the influence of extreme hunger and weariness. There he remained
until the morning, his heart palpitating from want of food; vermin
attacked his body, his breath became fetid, and he was altogether
changed; and the people of that village, coming to perform the
morning-prayers, found him lying there sick through want of food, yet
exhibiting evident traces of former affluence; and when they approached
him, they found him cold and hungry. They clad him, therefore, with an
old garment having ragged sleeves, and said to him, Whence art thou, O
stranger, and what is the cause of thine infirmity? And Ghanim opened
his eyes and looked at them and wept; but he returned them no answer.
Then one of them, knowing the violence of his hunger, went and brought
him a saucer of honey and two cakes of bread, and he ate, while they sat
around him until the sun rose, when they departed to their several
occupations.--In this state he remained among them for a month, and his
infirmity and disease increased; so the people, commiserating him,
consulted together respecting his case, and agreed to transport him to
the hospital at Baghdad.

Now while they were thus conversing, lo, two women, beggars, came in to
him; and they were his mother and sister; and when he beheld them, he
gave them the bread that was at his head, and they slept by him the next
night; but he knew them not. And on the following day, the people of the
village came to him, bringing a camel, and said to its owner, Convey
this sick person on the camel, and when thou hast arrived at Baghdad,
put him down at the door of the hospital: perhaps he may recover his
health, and thou wilt receive a recompense. He answered them, I hear and
obey. So they brought forth Ghanim the son of Eiyoob from the mosque,
and placed him, with the round mat upon which he was sleeping, on the
camel; and his mother and sister came to look at him among the other
people; but they knew him not. Then observing him attentively, they
said, Verily he resembleth our Ghanim! Can he be this sick person or
not?--But as to Ghanim, he awoke not until he was mounted on the camel,
and he began to weep and moan; and the people of the village saw his
mother and sister weeping for him, though they did not know him. Then
his mother and sister journeyed onwards to Baghdad, while the
camel-driver also proceeded without stopping until he had deposited
Ghanim at the door of the hospital, when he took his camel, and
returned.

Ghanim remained lying there until the morning; and when the people began
to pass along the street, they beheld him. He had become so emaciated
that his form resembled that of a toothpick, and the people ceased not
to gaze at him until the Sheykh of the market came and repelled them
from him, and said, I will gain Paradise by means of this poor person;
for if they take him into the hospital they will kill him in one day. He
then ordered his young men to carry him, and they conveyed him to his
house, where he spread for him a new bed, and put for him a new cushion,
and said to his wife, Serve him faithfully. She replied, On the
head:--and she tucked up her sleeves, and, having heated for him some
water, washed his hands and feet and body, and clothed him in a vest of
one of her female slaves. She then gave him to drink a cup of wine, and
sprinkled rose-water upon him: so he recovered his senses; and he
remembered his beloved, oot-el-uloob, and his anguish increased.--Thus
did it happen to Ghanim.

Now as to oot-el-uloob,--when the Khaleefeh, incensed against her,
had lodged her in the dark chamber, she remained there in the same state
for eighty days; and it happened that the Khaleefeh passed one day by
that place, and heard her reciting verses; and when she had finished her
recitation of them, she exclaimed, O my beloved! O Ghanim! How kind art
thou, and how chaste is thy disposition! Thou hast acted with kindness
unto him who hath injured thee, and hast guarded the honour of him who
hath violated thine, and hast protected his areem and he hath enslaved
both thee and thy family; but thou wilt assuredly stand, with the Prince
of the Faithful, before a Just Judge, and thou wilt obtain justice
against him on the day when the judge shall be God; and the witnesses,
the angels!--And when the Khaleefeh heard her words, and understood her
complaint, he knew that she was injured; and he entered his palace, and
sent the eunuch to her, and when she came before him she hung down her
head, with weeping eye, and sorrowful heart; and he said to her, O
oot-el-uloob, I see that thou complainest of my oppression, and
accusest me of tyranny, and thinkest that I have injured him who hath
acted kindly unto me. Who then is he who hath guarded my honour and I
have violated his; and who hath protected my areem and I have enslaved
his?--She answered him, Ghanim the son of Eiyoob; for he
hath not attempted any dishonest action towards me, by thy beneficence,
O Prince of the Faithful!--Upon this the Khaleefeh exclaimed, There is
no strength nor power but in God!--and then added, O oot-el-uloob,
desire of me what thou wilt, and I will grant thy wish. So she replied,
I desire of thee my beloved, Ghanim the son of Eiyoob. And when he heard
her words, he said, I will cause him to be brought hither, if it be the
will of God, in honour.--O Prince of the Faithful, she rejoined, when
thou shalt have caused him to be brought, wilt thou present me to him?
He answered, When I have had him brought, I will present thee to him,
the present of a generous man who will not revoke his gift. So she said,
O Prince of the Faithful, permit me to search about for him: perhaps God
may unite me with him. And he replied, Do as thou wilt.

Upon this she rejoiced, and went forth, taking with her a thousand
pieces of gold and visited the sheykhs, and gave alms for the sake of
Ghanim: and on the following day she went to the market of
the merchants, and gave to the chief of the market some money, saying to
him, Bestow it in alms upon the strangers. Then again, in the following
week, she went forth, taking with her a thousand pieces of gold, and,
entering the market of the goldsmiths and jewellers, summoned the chief
of the market, and he came, and she gave him the thousand pieces of
gold, and said to him, Bestow it in alms upon the strangers: whereupon
the chief, who was the Sheykh of the market before mentioned, looked at
her, and said to her, Wilt thou go with me to my house, to look at a
young stranger there, and see how elegant he is, and how perfectly
charming? For it is probable that he is Ghanim the son of Eiyoob, the
Distracted Slave of Love.--But the chief had no knowledge of him, and
imagined that he was a poor person involved in debt, whose wealth had
been taken from him, or a lover parted from his beloved. And when she
heard his words, her heart beat, and her affections were engrossed by
him, and she answered, Send with me some one to conduct me to thy house.
So he sent with her a young boy, who conducted her to the house where
the stranger was lodged, and she thanked him for doing so; and when she
entered the house, and saluted the chief's wife, the latter arose, and
kissed the ground before her; for she knew her. Then oot-el-uloob said
to her, Where is the sick person who is with you? And she wept, and
answered, Here he is, O my mistress: but he is of a respectable family,
and exhibiteth traces of former affluence. And oot-el-uloob looked
towards the bed upon which he was lying, and, regarding him narrowly,
beheld him as though he were Ghanim himself; but his condition was
changed, and he had become so emaciated that he resembled a toothpick,
and the truth of his case was disguised from her, so that she did not
discover him to be the person whom she sought; but she was moved with
compassion for him, and she wept, and exclaimed, Verily, strangers are
objects of pity, though they be emeers in their own countries! She then
ordered for him supplies of wine and medicines, and sat at his head a
while, and mounted, and returned to her palace; and she continued to go
forth to every market for the purpose of searching for Ghanim.



Soon after, the chief of the market brought the mother of Ghanim, and
his sister Fitneh, and went with them to oot-el-uloob, and said to
her, O most charitable lady, there have entered our city this day a
woman and a girl of respectable origin, bearing evident traces of former
affluence, but they are clad in garments of hair-cloth, and each of them
hath a wallet hung to her neck, and their eyes are weeping, and their
hearts sorrowful: so I have brought them unto thee, that thou mayest
give them refuge, and preserve them from the disgrace of beggary; for
they are not persons suited to ask alms of the sordid; and if it please
God, we shall enter Paradise by their means.--By Allah, O my master,
she replied, thou hast made me long to behold them! Where are they?
Order them to come in.--So, upon this, Fitneh and her mother came in to
oot-el-uloob, who, when she saw them, and observed that they were both
distinguished by beauty, wept for them, and said, By Allah, they are
persons of an affluent family, and traces of wealth are conspicuous in
their appearance.--O my mistress, replied the chief of the market, we
love the poor and indigent for the sake of future recompense;
and probably the extortioners have oppressed these two persons, and
plundered them of their wealth, and ruined their houses. Then these two
females wept violently, and, remembering Ghanim the son of Eiyoob, the
Distracted Slave of Love, their wailing increased, and oot-el-uloob
wept with them; and the mother of Ghanim exclaimed, We pray God to unite
us with him whom we seek, and he is my son Ghanim the son of Eiyoob.
When oot-el-uloob, therefore, heard these words, she knew that this
woman was the mother of her beloved, and that the other was his sister,
and she wept until she fell down in a swoon; and when she recovered, she
approached them, and said to them, Ye have nothing to fear; for this day
is the first of your prosperity, and the last of your adversity:
therefore grieve not. She then ordered the chief of the market to take
them to his house, and to let his wife conduct them into the bath, and
attire them in handsome clothing, and take care of them, and treat them
with the utmost honour; and she gave him a sum of money.

Then, on the following day, oot-el-uloob mounted and went again to the
house of the chief of the market, and went in to visit his wife, who
rose to her, and kissed the ground before her, and thanked her for her
charity; and she saw that his wife had conducted the mother of Ghanim,
and his sister, to the bath, and taken off their former clothes, and
that the traces of their original affluence had become more conspicuous
in consequence; and she sat a while conversing with them; after which
she asked the wife of the chief of the market respecting the sick person
who was with her. She answered, He is in the same state. And
oot-el-uloob said, Arise, and let us look at him and visit him. So
they both arose, with Ghanim's mother and sister, and went in to him,
and seated themselves by him; and when Ghanim the son of Eiyoob, the
Distracted Slave of Love, heard one of them mention oot-el-uloob,
emaciated as he was in body and limbs, his soul returned to him, and he
raised his head from the pillow, and called out, O oot-el-uloob! She
looked at him, therefore, and knew him, and cried, saying, Yes, O my
beloved! He then said to her, Draw near to me. And she asked him, Art
thou Ghanim the son of Eiyoob, the Distracted Slave of Love? He answered
her, Yes: I am he. And upon this, she fell down in a swoon; and when his
sister and his mother heard their words, they cried out, Oh, our
joy!--and in like manner fainted. And when they recovered,
oot-el-uloob said to Ghanim, Praise be to God who hath united us with
thee and with thy mother and sister! Then, approaching him, she related
to him all that had happened to her with the Khaleefeh, adding, I said
to him, I have declared to thee the truth, O Prince of the
Faithful:--and he believed my words, and approved thee; and he is now
desiring to see thee. And she said to him, The Khaleefeh hath given me
to thee:--whereupon he was filled with the utmost joy: and
oot-el-uloob said to them all, Quit not this place until I come again.

She then arose immediately, and departed to her palace, and removed
thence the chest that she had brought from Ghanim's house, and took
forth from it some pieces of gold, which she gave to the chief of the
market, saying to him, Take these pieces of gold, and buy for each of
them four complete suits of dress of the best kinds of stuff, and twenty
handkerchiefs, and whatever else they require. And after this, she
conducted them to the bath, and gave orders to wash them, and prepared
for them boiled meats, and infusion of galangal, and apple-water, after
they had come forth from the bath and dressed themselves. For three days
she remained with them, feeding them with fowls and with boiled meats,
and giving them sherbet of refined sugar to drink; and after the three
days their spirits returned to them. Then she conducted them again to
the bath, and they came forth, and she changed their clothes, and,
leaving them in the house of the chief of the market, went to the
Khaleefeh, and kissed the ground before him, and related to him the
story, telling him that her master, Ghanim the son of Eiyoob, the
Distracted Slave of Love, had come, and that his mother and sister also
had arrived. When the Khaleefeh, therefore, heard these words of
oot-el-uloob, he said to the eunuchs, Bring hither to me Ghanim. And
Jaafar went down with them to bring him: but oot-el-uloob had gone
before him; and she went in unto Ghanim, and said to him, The Khaleefeh
hath sent to thee to bring thee before him: have a care then to display
eloquence of tongue, and firmness of heart, and sweetness of speech. And
she attired him in a magnificent dress, and gave him pieces of gold in
abundance, saying to him, Bestow plentifully upon the domestics of the
Khaleefeh as thou goest in to him. And lo, Jaafar approached him,
mounted upon his mule, and Ghanim advanced to meet him, and greeted him
with a prayer for long life, kissing the ground before him.

The planet of his prosperity had appeared, and the star of his glory had
risen aloft, and Jaafar took him, and they proceeded until they entered
into the presence of the Prince of the Faithful; and when Ghanim came
before him, he looked towards the wezeers and emeers and chamberlains
and lieutenants and the other officers of the court, and the warriours,
and, being eloquent of tongue, firm of heart, delicate in the style of
his language, and pleasing in the allusions it conveyed, he hung down
his head towards the ground, and then looked towards the Khaleefeh, and
addressed him in a series of complimentary verses. And when he had
finished his recitation, the Khaleefeh was delighted with the graces of
his person, and pleased with the eloquence of his tongue and the
sweetness of his speech; and he said to him, Approach me. He therefore
approached him, and the Khaleefeh said to him, Explain to me thy tale,
and acquaint me with the truth of thy history. So Ghanim sat, and
related to the Khaleefeh all that had happened to him from beginning to
end; and when the Khaleefeh knew that he spoke truth, he bestowed upon
him a dress of honour, and admitted him into his favour, and said to
him, Acquit me of responsibility. And he did so, and said
to him, O Prince of the Faithful, the slave and all that his hands
possess belong to his master:--and the Khaleefeh rejoiced. He then gave
orders to appropriate a palace to him exclusively, and appointed him
abundant pensions and allowances, and removed to him his mother and his
sister. And the Khaleefeh, hearing that his sister Fitneh was, in beauty
(as her name imported), a temptation, demanded her of him in marriage.
Ghanim therefore replied, She is thy handmaid, and I am thy
memlook. And the Khaleefeh thanked him, and gave him a hundred thousand
pieces of gold, and summoned the aee and witnesses, and
they performed the marriage-contract. Then he and Ghanim visited their
wives on the same day, the Khaleefeh going to Fitneh, and Ghanim the son
of Eiyoob to oot-el-uloob; and on the following morning, the Khaleefeh
ordered that all that had happened to Ghanim, from first to last, should
be committed to writing and inserted in the records, that his posterity
might consider it, and wonder at the disposals of destiny, and commit
their affairs unto the Creator of the night and the day.