Sale's Koran; note near the close of chap. ii.

   See De Sacy, Relation de l'Egypte par Abd-allatif, pp.
  381 et seq.; and Quatremere, Histoire des Sultans Mamlouks,
  vol. i. pp. 109 et seq., a work of very great value, especially
  for the notes.

   In his "Khia;" description of the principal street of
  Cairo, and its branches (MS. in my possession).

   In his "Khia;" description of the principal street of
  Cairo, and its branches; and account of the Khans.

   Idem; account of the eysareeyehs; and description of the
  principal street of Cairo, and its branches.

   The orthography of this celebrated name is disputed; and
  I may therefore mention that I have found it written Khall'kan
  in an Arabic MS. of the year of the Flight 843; and in many
  MSS. in which the reduplication of the _l_ is not marked, the
  vowel _a_ is given to the first syllable. According to the
  general opinion of the learned in Cairo, it is Khillikan.

   In his "Khia;" description of the principal street of
  Cairo.

   In his "Khia;" description of the suburbs or environ
  (awaee) of Cairo--[The latest date in that work, as far as I
  am aware, is found in the account of the mosques, in two
  separate places. It is that of the year of the Flight 843 (in
  the edition recently printed at Cairo); and, as El-Mareezee
  died in the year 845, its occurrence is curious as shewing the
  likelihood that he continued the composition of his most
  celebrated work until very near his death. Indeed, it is
  probable that he never finished it; the seventh and last
  section, which is mentioned in the Preface, being wanting in
  all the MSS. This date, in each instance, may be an insertion
  by a later hand; but the author's History of the Sulans of
  Egypt was brought down, it is said by himself, to the year
  preceding his death.--ED.]

   Marginal note, in my copy of the original, by the sheykh
  Mohammad 'Eiyad.

   Marginal note, in my copy of the original, by the sheykh
  Moammad 'Eiyad.

   Idem.

   A specimen of this mode of chanting is given in my work
  on the Modern Egyptians, vol. ii. end of chap. v.

   El-Mareezee's "Khia;" account of the hospitals.

   ur-an, ch. v. v. 49.

   "Modern Egyptians," vol. i. ch. xiii.

   It would not be necessary to remark on this explanation
  of a curious custom if it had not been lately contradicted. Mr.
  Lane derived his information from Arab authors, and from his
  friends in Cairo; but D'Ohsson, also, says, in his Tableau
  General de l'Empire Othoman, Code Religieux, livre ii. ch. iv.
  (and the authority of the works from which he translated will
  hardly be questioned), that the Khaeeb "est meme tenu de
  reciter tout le _Khouthbe_ sur la chaire, _Minnber_, en
  s'appuyant de la main sur la garde d'un sabre, dans tous les
  temples qui ont ete pris avec la ville par la force des armes."
  The writer alluded to thinks that the use of the sword at
  Mekkeh proves Mr. Lane to be in error; whereas the custom is
  observed at Mekkeh because it was taken in war; but not at
  El-Medeeneh because this city was not so taken.--ED.

   The iameh see Note 24 to Chapter iv.

   For a more full account of the Friday-prayers, see my
  work on the Modern Egyptians, vol. i. ch. iii.

   Ammianus Marcellinus, lib. xxii.

   See Note 6 to Chapter iv.

   D'Herbelot, Bibl. Or., article "Cadhi."