THE STORY OF THE FIRST SHEYKH AND THE GAZELLE.

Then said the sheykh, Know, O 'Efreet, that this gazelle is the daughter
of my paternal uncle, and she is of my flesh and my blood. I
took her as my wife when she was young, and lived with her
about thirty years; but I was not blessed with a child by her; so I took
to me a concubine slave, and by her I was blessed with a male
child, like the rising full moon, with beautiful eyes, and
delicately-shaped eyebrows, and perfectly-formed limbs; and he grew up
by little and little until he attained the age of fifteen years. At this
period, I unexpectedly had occasion to journey to a certain city, and
went thither with a great stock of merchandise.

Now my cousin, this gazelle, had studied enchantment and
divination from her early years; and during my absence, she transformed
the youth above mentioned into a calf; and his mother, into a
cow; and committed them to the care of the herdsman: and when
I returned, after a long time, from my journey, I asked after my son and
his mother, and she said, Thy slave is dead, and thy son hath fled, and
I know not whither he is gone. After hearing this, I remained for the
space of a year with mourning heart and weeping eye, until the Festival
of the Sacrifice; when I sent to the herdsman, and ordered
him to choose for me a fat cow; and he brought me one, and it was my
concubine, whom this gazelle had enchanted. I tucked up my skirts and
sleeves, and took the knife in my hand, and prepared myself
to slaughter her; upon which she moaned and cried so violently that I
left her, and ordered the herdsman to kill and skin her: and he did so,
but found in her neither fat nor flesh, nor anything but skin and bone;
and I repented of slaughtering her, when repentance was of no avail. I
therefore gave her to the herdsman, and said to him, Bring me a fat
calf: and he brought me my son, who was transformed into a calf. And
when the calf saw me, he broke his rope, and came to me, and fawned upon
me, and wailed and cried, so that I was moved with pity for him; and I
said to the herdsman, Bring me a cow, and let this--



Here Shahrazad perceived the light of morning, and discontinued the
recitation with which she had been allowed thus far to proceed. Her
sister said to her, How excellent is thy story! and how pretty! and how
pleasant! and how sweet!--but she answered, What is this in comparison
with that which I will relate to thee in the next night, if I live, and
the King spare me! And the King said, By Allah, I will not kill her
until I hear the remainder of her story. Thus they pleasantly passed the
night until the morning, when the King went forth to his hall of
judgment, and the Wezeer went thither with the grave-clothes under his
arm: and the King gave judgment, and invested and displaced, until the
close of the day, without informing the Wezeer of that which had
happened; and the minister was greatly astonished. The court was then
dissolved; and the King returned to the privacy of his palace.

[On the second and each succeeding night, Shahrazad continued so to
interest King Shahriyar by her stories as to induce him to defer putting
her to death, in expectation that her fund of amusing tales would soon
be exhausted; and as this is expressed in the original work in nearly
the same words at the close of every night, such repetitions will in the
present translation be omitted.

When the sheykh, continued Shahrazad, observed the tears of the calf,
his heart sympathized with him, and he said to the herdsman, Let this
calf remain with the cattle.--Meanwhile, the Jinnee wondered at this
strange story; and the owner of the gazelle thus proceeded.

O lord of the kings of the Jann, while this happened, my cousin, this
gazelle, looked on, and said, Slaughter this calf; for he is fat: but I
could not do it; so I ordered the herdsman to take him back; and he took
him and went away. And as I was sitting, on the following day, he came
to me, and said, O my master, I have to tell thee something that thou
wilt be rejoiced to hear; and a reward is due to me for bringing good
news. I answered, Well:--and he said, O merchant, I have a
daughter who learned enchantment in her youth from an old woman in our
family; and yesterday, when thou gavest me the calf, I took him to her,
and she looked at him, and covered her face, and wept, and then laughed,
and said, O my father, hath my condition become so degraded in thy
opinion that thou bringest before me strange men?--Where,
said I, are any strange men? and wherefore didst thou weep and laugh?
She answered, This calf that is with thee is the son of our master, the
merchant, and the wife of our master hath enchanted both him and his
mother; and this was the reason of my laughter; but as to the reason of
my weeping, it was on account of his mother, because his father had
slaughtered her.--And I was excessively astonished at this; and scarcely
was I certain that the light of morning had appeared when I hastened to
inform thee.



When I heard, O Jinnee, the words of the herdsman, I went forth with
him, intoxicated without wine, from the excessive joy and happiness that
I received, and arrived at his house, where his daughter welcomed me,
and kissed my hand; and the calf came to me, and fawned upon me. And I
said to the herdsman's daughter, Is that true which thou hast said
respecting this calf? She answered, Yes, O my master; he is verily thy
son, and the vital spirit of thy heart.--O maiden, said I, if thou wilt
restore him, all the cattle and other property of mine that thy father
hath under his care shall be thine. Upon this, she smiled, and said, O
my master, I have no desire for the property unless on two conditions:
the first is, that thou shalt marry me to him; and the second, that I
shall enchant her who enchanted him, and so restrain her; otherwise, I
shall not be secure from her artifice. On hearing, O Jinnee, these her
words, I said, And thou shalt have all the property that is under the
care of thy father besides; and as to my cousin, even her blood shall be
lawful to thee. So, when she heard this, she took a cup, and filled it
with water, and repeated a spell over it, and sprinkled with it the
calf, saying to him, If God created thee a calf, remain in this form,
and be not changed; but if thou be enchanted, return to thy original
form, by permission of God, whose name be exalted!--upon which he shook,
and became a man; and I threw myself upon him, and said, I conjure thee
by Allah that thou relate to me all that my cousin did to thee and to
thy mother. So he related to me all that had happened to them both; and
I said to him, O my son, God hath given thee one to liberate thee, and
to avenge thee:--and I married to him, O Jinnee, the herdsman's
daughter; after which, she transformed my cousin into this gazelle. And
as I happened to pass this way, I saw this merchant, and asked him what
had happened to him; and when he had informed me, I sat down to see the
result.--This is my story. The Jinnee said, This is a wonderful tale;
and I give up to thee a third of my claim to his blood.

The second sheykh, the owner of the two hounds, then advanced, and said
to the Jinnee, If I relate to thee the story of myself and these hounds,
and thou find it to be in like manner wonderful, wilt thou remit to me,
also, a third of thy claim to the blood of this merchant? The Jinnee
answered, Yes.


THE STORY OF THE SECOND SHEYKH AND THE TWO BLACK HOUNDS.

Then said the sheykh, Know, O lord of the kings of the Jann, that these
two hounds are my brothers. My father died, and left to us three
thousand pieces of gold; to
sell and buy. But one of my brothers made a journey, with a stock of
merchandise, and was absent from us for the space of a year with the
caravans; after which, he returned destitute. I said to him, Did I not
advise thee to abstain from travelling? But he wept, and said, O my
brother, God, to whom be ascribed all might and glory, decreed this
event; and there is no longer any profit in these words: I have nothing
left. So I took him up into the shop, and then went with him to the
bath, and clad him in a costly suit of my own clothing; after which, we
sat down together to eat; and I said to him, O my brother, I will
calculate the gain of my shop during the year, and divide it, exclusive
of the principal, between me and thee. Accordingly, I made the
calculation, and found my gain to amount to two thousand pieces of gold;
and I praised God, to whom be ascribed all might and glory, and rejoiced
exceedingly, and divided the gain in two equal parts between myself and
him.--My other brother then set forth on a journey; and after a year,
returned in the like condition; and I did unto him as I had done to the
former.

After this, when we had lived together for some time, my brothers again
wished to travel, and were desirous that I should accompany them; but I
would not. What, said I, have ye gained in your travels, that I should
expect to gain? They importuned me; but I would not comply with their
request; and we remained selling and buying in our shops a whole year.
Still, however, they persevered in proposing that we should travel, and
I still refused, until after the lapse of six entire years, when at last
I consented, and said to them, O my brothers, let us calculate what
property we possess. We did so, and found it to be six thousand pieces
of gold: and I then said to them, We will bury half of it in the earth,
that it may be of service to us if any misfortune befall us, in which
case each of us shall take a thousand pieces, with which to
traffic. Excellent is thy advice, said they. So I took the
money and divided it into two equal portions, and buried three thousand
pieces of gold; and of the other half, I gave to each of them a thousand
pieces. We then prepared merchandise, and hired a ship, and embarked our
goods, and proceeded on our voyage for the space of a whole month, at
the expiration of which we arrived at a city, where we sold our
merchandise; and for every piece of gold we gained ten.