The people were now repairing to perform the Friday-prayers; and some
merely cast their eyes at him, while others noticed him not: but while
he was in this state, deprived of his whole property, and weeping
without intermission, a female approached him, on her way to attend the
Friday-prayers: she was of admirable loveliness; the odour of musk was
diffused from her; under her was a mule with a stuffed saddle covered
with gold-embroidered silk; and with her was a number of servants; and
when she saw the broken glass, and my brother's state and his tears, she
was moved with pity for him, and asked respecting his case. She was
answered, He had a tray of glass, by the sale of which to obtain his
subsistence and it is broken, and he is afflicted as thou seest:--and
upon this, she called to one of the servants, saying, Give what thou
hast with thee to this poor man. So he gave him a purse, and he took it,
and when he had opened it, he found in it five hundred pieces of gold,
whereupon he almost died from excessive joy, and offered up prayers for
his benefactress.

He returned to his house a rich man, and sat reflecting, and lo, a
person knocked at the door: he rose, therefore, and opened it; and
beheld an old woman whom he knew not, and she said to him, O my son,
know that the time of prayer hath almost expired, and I am not prepared
by ablution; wherefore I beg that thou wilt admit me into thy house,
that I may perform it. He replied, I hear and obey;--and, retiring
within, gave her permission to enter; his mind still wandering from joy
on account of the gold; and when she had finished the ablution, she
approached the spot where he was sitting, and there performed the
prayers of two rek'ahs. She then offered up a supplication for my
brother; and he thanked her, and offered her two pieces of gold; but
when she saw this, she exclaimed, Extolled be God's perfection! Verily I
wonder at the person who fell in love with thee in thy beggarly
condition! Take back thy money from me, and if thou want it not, return
it to her who gave it thee when thy glass broke.--O my mother, said he,
how can I contrive to obtain access to her? She answered, O my son, she
hath an affection for thee; but she is the wife of an affluent man; take
then with thee all thy money, and when thou art with her be not
deficient in courteousness and agreeable words; so shalt thou obtain of
her favours and her wealth whatever thou shalt desire. My brother,
therefore, took all the gold, and arose and went with the old woman,
hardly believing what she had told him; and she proceeded, and my
brother behind her, until they arrived at a great door, at which she
knocked; whereupon a Greek damsel came and opened the door, and the old
woman entered, ordering my brother to do the same. He did so, and found
himself in a large house, where he beheld a great furnished chamber,
with curtains hung in it; and, seating himself there, he put down the
gold before him, and placed his turban on his knees; and
scarcely had he done so, when there came to him a damsel, the like of
whom had never been seen, attired in most magnificent apparel. My
brother stood up at her approach; and when she beheld him, she laughed
in his face, and rejoiced at his visit: then going to the door, she
locked it; after which she returned to my brother, and took his hand,
and both of them went together into a private chamber, carpeted with
various kinds of silk, where my brother sat down, and she seated herself
by his side, and toyed with him for a considerable time. She then rose,
saying to him, Move not from this place until I return to thee;--and was
absent from him for a short period;--and as my brother was waiting for
her, there came in to him a black slave, of gigantic stature, with a
drawn sword, the brightness of which dazzled the sight; and he exclaimed
to my brother. Wo to thee! Who brought thee to this place? Thou vilest
of men! Thou misbegotten wretch, and nursling of impurity!--My brother
was unable to make any reply; his tongue was instantly tied; and the
slave laid hold upon him, and stripped him, and struck him more than
eighty blows with the flat of his sword, until he fell sprawling upon
the floor; when he retired from him, concluding that he was dead, and
uttered a great cry, so that the earth trembled, and the place resounded
at his voice, saying, Where is El-Meleeah?--upon which a
girl came to him, holding a handsome tray containing salt; and with this
she forthwith stuffed the flesh-wounds with which my brother's skin was
gashed until they gaped open; but he moved not, fearing the slave would
discover that he was alive, and kill him. The girl then went away, and
the slave uttered another cry, like the first, whereupon the old woman
came to my brother, and, dragging him by the feet to a deep and dark
vault, threw him into it upon a heap of slain. In this place
he remained for two whole days; and God (whose perfection be extolled!)
made the salt to be the means of preserving his life, by stanching the
flow of blood from his veins; so, when he found that he had strength
sufficient to move, he arose, and, opening a shutter in the wall,
emerged from the place of the slain; and God (to whom be ascribed all
might and glory!) granted him his protection. He therefore proceeded in
the darkness, and concealed himself in the passage until the morning,
when the old woman went forth to seek another victim, and my brother,
going out after her, without her knowledge, returned to his house.



He now occupied himself with the treatment of his wounds until he was
restored; and continued to watch for the old woman, and constantly saw
her taking men, one after another, and conducting them to the same
house. But he uttered not a word on the subject; and when his health
returned, and his strength was completely renewed, he took a piece of
rag, and made of it a purse, which he filled with pieces of glass: he
then tied it to his waist, and disguised himself so that no one would
know him, in the dress of a foreigner; and, taking a sword, placed it
within his clothes; and as soon as he saw the old woman, he said to her,
in the dialect of a foreigner, Old woman, hast thou a pair of scales fit
for weighing nine hundred pieces of gold? The old woman answered, I have
a young son, a money-changer, and he hath all kinds of scales; therefore
accompany me to him before he go forth from his abode, that he may weigh
for thee thy gold. So my brother said, Walk on before me:--and she went,
and my brother followed her until she arrived at the door, and knocked;
upon which the girl came out, and laughed in his face; and the old woman
said to her, I have brought you to-day some fat meat. The girl then took
my brother's hand, and conducted him into the house (the same which he
had entered before), and after she had sat with him a short time, she
rose, saying to him, Quit not this place until I return to thee:--and
she retired; and my brother had remained not long after when the slave
came to him with the drawn sword, and said to him, Rise, thou unlucky!
So my brother rose, and, as the slave walked before him, he put his hand
to the sword which was concealed beneath his clothes, and struck the
slave with it, and cut off his head; after which he dragged him by his
feet to the vault, and called out, Where is El-Meleeah? The slave-girl,
therefore, came, having in her hand the tray containing the salt; but
when she saw my brother with the sword in his hand, she turned back and
fled: my brother, however, overtook her, and struck off her head. He
then called out, Where is the old woman?--and she came; and he said to
her, Dost thou know me, O malevolent hag? She answered, No, O my
lord.--I am, said he, the man who had the pieces of gold, and in whose
house thou performedst the ablution and prayedst; after which, devising
a stratagem against me, thou betrayedst me into this place.--The old
woman exclaimed, Fear God in thy treatment of me!--but my brother,
turning towards her, struck her with the sword, and clove her in twain.
He then went to search for the chief damsel, and when she saw him, her
reason fled, and she implored his pardon; whereupon he granted her his
pardon, and said to her, What occasioned thy falling into the hands of
this black? She answered, I was a slave to one of the merchants, and
this old woman used to visit me; and one day she said to me, We are
celebrating a festivity, the like of which no one hath seen, and I have
a desire that thou shouldst witness it. I replied, I hear and obey:--and
arose, and clad myself in the best of my attire, and, taking with me a
purse containing a hundred pieces of gold, proceeded with her
until she entered this house, when suddenly this black took me, and I
have continued with him in this state three years, through the stratagem
of the old witch.--My brother then said to her, Is there any property of
his in the house?--Abundance, she answered; and if thou canst remove it,
do so:--and upon this, he arose and went with her, when she opened to
him chests filled with purses, at the sight of which he was confounded;
and she said to him, Go now, and leave me here, and bring some person to
remove the property. So he went out, and, having hired ten men,
returned; but on his arrival at the door, he found it open, and saw
neither the damsel nor the purses; he found, however, some little money
remaining, and the stuffs. He discovered, therefore, that she had
eluded him; and he took the money that remained, and, opening the
closets, took all the stuffs which they contained, leaving nothing in
the house.

He passed the next night full of happiness; but when the morning came,
he found at the door twenty soldiers, and on his going forth to them,
they laid hold upon him, saying, The Walee summoneth thee. So they took
him, and conducted him to the Walee, who, when he saw him, said to him,
Whence obtainedst thou these stuffs?--Grant me indemnity, said my
brother:--and the Walee gave him the handkerchief of indemnity;
and my brother related to him all that had befallen him with the old
woman from first to last, and the flight of the damsel; adding,--and of
that which I have taken, take thou what thou wilt; but leave me
wherewith to procure my food. The Walee thereupon demanded the whole of
the money and the stuffs; but fearing that the Sulan might become
acquainted with the matter, he retained a portion only, and gave the
rest to my brother, saying to him, Quit this city, or I will hang thee.
My brother replied, I hear and obey:--and went forth to one of the
surrounding cities. Some robbers, however, came upon him, and stripped
and beat him, and cut off his ears; and I, having heard of his
situation, went forth to him, taking to him some clothes; and brought
him back privily into the city, and supplied him with daily food and
drink.