THE STORY OF THE HUSBAND AND THE PARROT.

There was a certain merchant, of an excessively jealous disposition,
having a wife endowed with perfect beauty, who had prevented him from
leaving his home; but an event happened which obliged him to make a
journey; and when he found his doing so to be indispensable, he went to
the market in which birds were sold, and bought a parrot, which he
placed in his house to act as a spy, that, on his return, she might
inform him of what passed during his absence; for this parrot was
cunning and intelligent, and remembered whatever she heard. So,
when he had made his journey, and accomplished his business, he
returned, and caused the parrot to be brought to him, and asked her
respecting the conduct of his wife. She answered, Thy wife has a lover,
who visited her every night during thy absence:--and when the man heard
this, he fell into a violent rage, and went to his wife, and gave her a
severe beating.

The woman imagined that one of the female slaves had informed him of
what had passed between her and her paramour during his absence: she
therefore called them together, and made them swear; and they all swore
that they had not told their master anything of the matter; but
confessed that they had heard the parrot relate to him what had passed.
Having thus established, on the testimony of the slaves, the fact of the
parrot's having informed her husband of her intrigue, she ordered one of
these slaves to grind with a hand-mill under the cage, another to
sprinkle water from above, and a third to move a mirror from side to
side, during the next night on which her husband was absent; and on the
following morning, when the man returned from an entertainment at which
he had been present, and inquired again of the parrot what had passed
that night during his absence, the bird answered, O my master, I could
neither see nor hear anything, on account of the excessive darkness, and
thunder, and lightning, and rain. Now this happened during summer: so he
said to her, What strange words are these? It is now summer, when
nothing of what thou hast described ever happens.--The parrot, however,
swore by Allah the Great that what she had said was true; and that it
had so happened: upon which the man, not understanding the case, nor
knowing the plot, became violently enraged, and took out the bird from
the cage, and threw her down upon the ground with such violence that he
killed her.

But after some days, one of his female slaves informed him of the truth;
yet he would not believe it, until he saw his wife's paramour going out
from his house; when he drew his sword, and slew the traitor by
a blow on the back of his neck: so also did he to his treacherous wife;
and thus both of them went, laden with the sin which they had committed,
to the fire; and the merchant discovered that the parrot had informed
him truly of what she had seen; and he mourned grievously for her loss.

When the Wezeer heard these words of King Yoonan, he said, O King of
great dignity, what hath this crafty sage--this man from whom nought but
mischief proceedeth--done unto me, that I should be his enemy, and speak
evil of him, and plot with thee to destroy him? I have informed thee
respecting him in compassion for thee, and in fear of his despoiling
thee of thy happiness; and if my words be not true, destroy me, as the
Wezeer of Es-Sindibad was destroyed.--The King asked, How was that? And
the Wezeer thus answered:--


THE STORY OF THE ENVIOUS WEZEER AND THE PRINCE AND THE GHOOLEH.

The King above mentioned had a son who was ardently fond of the
chase; and he had a Wezeer whom he charged to be always with this
son wherever he went. One day the son went forth to hunt, and his
father's Wezeer was with him; and as they rode together, they saw a
great wild beast; upon which the Wezeer exclaimed to the Prince, Away
after this wild beast! The King's son pursued it until he was out of the
sight of his attendants, and the beast also escaped from before his eyes
in the desert; and while the Prince wandered in perplexity, not knowing
whither to direct his course, he met in his way a damsel, who was
weeping. He said to her, Who art thou?--and she answered, I am a
daughter of one of the kings of India; I was in the desert, and slumber
overtook me, and I fell from my horse in a state of insensibility, and
being thus separated from my attendants, I lost my way. The Prince, on
hearing this, pitied her forlorn state, and placed her behind him on his
horse; and as they proceeded, they passed by a ruin, and the
damsel said to him, O my master, I would alight here for a little while.
The Prince therefore lifted her from his horse at this ruin; but she
delayed so long to return, that he wondered wherefore she had loitered
so, and entering after her, without her knowledge, perceived that she
was a Ghooleh, and heard her say, My children, I have brought you
to-day a fat young man:--on which they exclaimed, Bring him in to us, O
mother! that we may fill our stomachs with his flesh. When the Prince
heard their words, he felt assured of destruction; the muscles of his
sides quivered, and fear overcame him, and he retreated. The Ghooleh
then came forth, and, seeing that he appeared alarmed and fearful, and
that he was trembling, said to him, Wherefore dost thou fear? He
answered, I have an enemy of whom I am in fear. The Ghooleh said, Thou
assertest thyself to be the son of the King. He replied, Yes.--Then,
said she, wherefore dost thou not give some money to thine enemy, and so
conciliate him? He answered, He will not be appeased with money, nor
with anything but life; and therefore do I fear him: I am an injured
man. She then said to him, If thou be an injured man, as thou affirmest,
beg aid of God against thine oppressor, and He will avert from thee his
mischievous design, and that of every other person whom thou fearest.
Upon this, therefore, the Prince raised his head towards heaven, and
said, O thou who answerest the distressed when he prayeth to Thee, and
dispellest evil, assist me, and cause mine enemy to depart from me; for
Thou art able to do whatsoever Thou wilt!--and the Ghooleh no sooner
heard his prayer, than she departed from him. The Prince then returned
to his father, and informed him of the conduct of the Wezeer; upon which
the King gave orders that the minister should be put to death.