COMMENCING WITH PART OF THE HUNDRED AND SEVENTH NIGHT, AND
ENDING WITH PART OF THE HUNDRED AND THIRTY-SEVENTH.

THE STORY OF TAJ-EL-MULOOK AND THE LADY DUNYA.


There was, in former times, a city behind the mountains of Ipahan,
called El-Medeeneh el-Khara, and in it resided a King
called the King Suleyman. He was a person of liberality and beneficence,
and justice and integrity, and of a generous and obliging disposition:
travellers repaired to him from every quarter, and his fame spread
throughout all the regions and countries; and he reigned a long time in
glory and security; but he was destitute of children and of wives.

He had a Wezeer who nearly resembled him in his qualities, in liberality
and other endowments; and it came to pass that he sent to this Wezeer
one day, and having summoned him into his presence, said to him, O
Wezeer, my heart is contracted, and my patience is overcome, and my
strength is impaired, because I have neither a wife nor a child: this is
not the usual way of Kings who rule over lords and poor men; for they
rejoice in leaving children, and multiplying by them the number of their
posterity; and the Prophet (God bless and save him!) hath said,
Intermarry, and beget offspring, that ye may increase in number; for I
shall contend for your superiority with the other nations on the day of
resurrection.--What, then, is thy counsel, O Wezeer? Point out to me
what is advisable.--But when the Wezeer heard these words, tears poured
from his eyes, and he replied, Far be it from me, O King of the age,
that I should speak of that which belongeth unto the Compassionate to
decide! Dost thou desire that I should enter the fire of
Hell, through the anger of the Almighty King?--Know, O Wezeer, rejoined
his sovereign, that, if the King purchase a female slave whose rank and
lineage are unknown, he will not be acquainted with her ignoble origin
that he may abstain from her, or the nobility of her extraction that he
may make her his companion: so, if he do this, she may perhaps bear him
a son who may be a hypocrite, a tyrant, a shedder of blood; and she may
resemble a marshy land, the produce of which is worthless, and attaineth
no excellence: her child may be obnoxious to the indignation of his
Lord, not doing what He commandeth him, nor refraining from that which
He forbiddeth him to do. I will never, therefore, be the means of such
an event by purchasing a female slave. I desire, rather, that thou
demand in marriage for me one of the daughters of the Kings, whose
lineage is known, and whose loveliness is celebrated. If, then, thou
wilt point out to me one of good birth and of religion among the
daughters of the Muslim Kings, I will demand her as my wife, and marry
her in the presence of witnesses, that I may thereby obtain the approval
of the Lord of mankind.--The Wezeer replied, Verily God hath
accomplished thy want and given thee thy desire.--How so? asked the
King.--Know, O King, answered the Wezeer, that it hath been told me that
the King Zahr Shah, the sovereign of El-Ar el-Beya, hath
a daughter of astonishing loveliness, whom words cannot describe, whose
equal existeth not in this age, for she is endowed with the most perfect
beauty and symmetry, with black eye, and long hair, and slender waist,
and large hips; when she approacheth she seduceth, and when she turneth
her back she killeth, ravishing the heart and the eye. It is my opinion,
therefore, O King, that thou shouldst send to her father an intelligent
messenger, well-informed, and experienced in the course of events, that
he may courteously ask her in marriage for thee of her father; for she
hath no equal in the distant parts of the earth, nor in the near; so
shalt thou enjoy her lovely face, and the Glorious King shall approve
thy conduct; since it hath been handed down from the Prophet (God bless
and save him!) that he said, There is no monkery in El-Islam.

Upon this, the King was perfectly delighted, his bosom expanded with
joy, and anxiety and grief departed from him; and, addressing his
Wezeer, he said to him, Know, O Wezeer, that no one shall go on this
business but thou, on account of thy consummate wisdom and politeness:
depart, therefore, to thy house, and accomplish what thou hast to do,
and prepare thyself by the morrow, and demand for me in marriage this
damsel with whom thou hast caused my heart to be engrossed, and return
not to me without her. The Wezeer replied, I hear and obey:--and he went
to his house, and gave orders to bring presents suitable to Kings,
consisting of costly jewels and precious rarities, such as were light to
carry and of great value, together with Arab horses, and Davidean coats
of mail, and chests of wealth such as language would fail
to describe. These they placed upon the mules and camels, and the Wezeer
departed, accompanied by a hundred memlooks and a hundred male black
slaves and a hundred female slaves, and the flags and banners were
unfurled over his head. The King charged him to return soon; and after
his departure, the King Suleyman Shah burned with desire, and became
engrossed with love of the damsel night and day. Meanwhile, the Wezeer,
by night and by day traversed the deserts and wastes until there
remained between him and the city to which he was repairing one day's
journey, when he alighted at the bank of a river, and, having summoned
one of his chief officers, ordered him to go quickly to the King Zahr
Shah, and to acquaint him with his approach. He answered, I hear and
obey:--and went quickly to the city; and when he arrived there, it
happened that the King Zahr Shah was sitting in one of the places of
recreation before the gate of the city, and, seeing him as he entered,
knew him to be a stranger, and summoned him before him. So when the
messenger came to him, he informed him of the approach of the Wezeer of
the supreme King Suleyman Shah, the King of El-Ar el-Khara and of the
mountains of Ipahan; and the King Zahr Shah rejoiced, and welcomed the
messenger, and, having conducted him to his palace, said to him, Where
didst thou part from the Wezeer? He answered, I parted from him in the
morning at the bank of such a river, and to-morrow he will arrive and
visit thee: may God continue his favours unto thee, and show mercy unto
thy parents! Zahr Shah then ordered one of his wezeers to
take with him the greater number of his chief officers and chamberlains
and lieutenants and the lords of his court, and to go forth with them to
meet him, in honour of the King Suleyman Shah; for his dominion extended
through the land.

In the mean time, the Wezeer of Suleyman Shah remained where he had
halted until midnight, and then proceeded towards the city; and when the
morning gleamed, and the sun shone upon the hills and the lowlands,
suddenly the Wezeer of the King Zahr Shah, and his chamberlains and the
lords of his court and the chief officers of his kingdom, approached and
joined him at the distance of some leagues from the city. So the Wezeer
of Suleyman Shah felt sure of the accomplishment of his business, and
saluted those who met him; and the latter preceded him until they
arrived at the palace of the King, and passed in before him through the
entrance to the seventh vestibule. This was the place which no one
entered on horseback; for it was near to the King; therefore here the
Wezeer alighted, and he proceeded on foot until he came to a lofty
saloon, at the upper end of which was a couch of alabaster set with
pearls and jewels, having four legs of elephants' tusks, and upon it was
a mattress covered with green satin embroidered with red gold, and over
it was a canopy adorned with pearls and jewels. Upon this couch sat the
King Zahr Shah, and the lords of his court stood in attendance upon him.
And when the Wezeer went in unto him, and stood before him, he composed
his heart, and gave liberty to his tongue, and, displaying the oratory
of wezeers, and uttering the language of the eloquent, addressed the
King with courtesy of manner, and recited a series of complimentary
verses; and when he had finished, the King caused him to draw near,
treated him with the utmost respect, and, seating him by his side,
smiled in his face, and honoured him with a gracious reply. After this,
the attendants brought forward the table in that saloon, and they ate
until they were satisfied, when the attendants removed the table, and
every one who was present went forth, except the chief officers. When
the Wezeer, therefore, saw that they had quitted the hall, he rose and
stood on his feet, and, complimenting the King, kissed the ground
before him, and said, O great King, and dignified sovereign, I have come
unto thee and visited thee on an affair productive of peace and
prosperity and happiness unto thee; and it is this: I have come to thee
as an ambassador to desire in marriage thy daughter, the distinguished
by rank and lineage, from the King Suleyman Shah, who is endowed with
justice and integrity, and graciousness and beneficence, the King of
El-Ar el-Khara and of the mountains of Ipahan, and he hath sent unto
thee many presents and numerous rarities, desiring thine alliance. Dost
thou then wish the same of him?--He then stood silent, waiting for the
answer; and when the King Zahr Shah heard these words, he rose upon his
feet, and modestly kissed the ground; and the persons who were present
wondered at the King's condescension to the ambassador, and their minds
were amazed. The King then offered up praises unto Him who is possessed
of glory and honour, and said, still standing, O exalted Wezeer, and
illustrious lord, hear what I say: we are, unto the King Suleyman Shah,
among the number of his subjects, and shall be ennobled by his affinity:
we covet this distinction; and my daughter is one of his handmaids. This
is my greatest desire; that he may be a means of support to me, and my
reliance.--And he summoned the aees and witnesses, and they bore
witness that the King Suleyman Shah had appointed his Wezeer as his
deputy to effect the marriage, and the King Zahr Shah joyfully
officiated for his daughter in performing the contract; so the aees
concluded the marriage-contract, and offered up a prayer for the
happiness and prosperity of both parties: after which, the Wezeer arose,
and produced the presents and precious rarities, and all the gifts that
he had brought, and offered the whole to the King Zahr Shah.



The King then occupied himself in fitting out his daughter, and in
honourably entertaining the Wezeer; and he feasted at his banquets the
great and the abject, and continued the festivity for a period of two
months, omitting in it nothing that would rejoice the heart and the
eye. And when everything that the bride required was
completed, the King gave orders to carry forth the tents, and they were
pitched outside the city. They packed the stuffs in the chests, and made
ready the Greek and Turkish female slaves; and the King provided the
bride with precious treasures and costly jewels, and made for her a
litter of red gold adorned with pearls and jewels,
appropriating to her use ten mules for the journey. The litter appeared
like a private chamber, and its occupant like one of the beautiful
ooreeyehs, her canopy resembling one of the pavilions of
Paradise. They packed up the treasures and wealth, and placed them upon
the mules and camels, and the King Zahr Shah went with them to the
distance of three leagues, and then bade farewell to his daughter and
the Wezeer and his attendants, and returned home in joy and safety.