THE STORY TOLD BY THE JEWISH PHYSICIAN.

The most wonderful of the events that happened to me in my younger days
was this:--I was residing in Damascus, where I learnt and practised my
art; and while I was thus occupied, one day there came to me a memlook
from the house of the governor of the city: so I went forth with him,
and accompanied him to the abode of the governor. I entered, and beheld,
at the upper end of a saloon, a couch of alabaster overlaid with plates
of gold, upon which was reclining a sick man: he was young; and a person
more comely had not been seen in his age. Seating myself at his head, I
ejaculated a prayer for his restoration; and he made a sign
to me with his eye. I then said to him, O my master, stretch forth to me
thy hand:--whereupon he put forth to me his left hand; and I was
surprised at this, and said within myself, What self-conceit! I felt his
pulse, however, and wrote a prescription for him, and continued to visit
him for a period of ten days, until he recovered his strength; when he
entered the bath, and washed himself, and came forth: and the governor
conferred upon me a handsome dress of honour, and appointed me
superintendent of the hospital of Damascus. But when I went
with him into the bath, which they had cleared of all other visitors for
us alone, and the servants had brought the clothes, and taken away those
which he had pulled off within, I perceived that his right hand had been
cruelly amputated; at the sight of which I wondered, and grieved for
him; and looking at his skin, I observed upon him marks of beating with
mira'ahs, which caused me to wonder more. The young man then turned
towards me, and said, O doctor of the age, wonder not at my case; for I
will relate to thee my story when we have gone out from the bath:--and
when we had gone forth, and arrived at the house, and had eaten some
food, and rested, he said to me, Hast thou a desire to divert thyself in
the supper-room? I answered, Yes:--and immediately he ordered the slaves
to take up thither the furniture, and to roast a lamb and bring us some
fruit. So the slaves did as he commanded them: and when they had brought
the fruit, and we had eaten, I said to him, Relate to me thy story:--and
he replied, O doctor of the age, listen to the relation of the events
which have befallen me.

Know that I am of the children of El-Moil. My paternal grandfather died
leaving ten male children, one of whom was my father: he was the eldest
of them; and they all grew up and married; and my father was blest with
me; but none of his nine brothers was blest with children. So I grew up
among my uncles, who delighted in me exceedingly; and when I had
attained to manhood, I was one day with my father in the chief mosque of
El-Moil. The day was Friday; and we performed the congregational
prayers, and all the people went out, except my father and my uncles,
who sat conversing together respecting the wonders of various countries,
and the strange sights of different cities, until they mentioned Egypt;
when one of my uncles said, The travellers assert, that there is not on
the face of the earth a more agreeable country than Egypt with its
Nile:--and my father added, He who hath not seen Cairo hath
not seen the world: its soil is gold; its Nile is a wonder; its women
are like the black-eyed virgins of Paradise; its houses are palaces; and
its air is temperate; its odour surpassing that of aloes-wood, and
cheering the heart: and how can Cairo be otherwise when it is the
metropolis of the world? Did ye see its gardens in the
evening (he continued), with the shade obliquely extending over them, ye
would behold a wonder, and yield with ecstasy to their attractions.

When I heard these descriptions of Egypt, my mind became wholly engaged
by reflections upon that country; and after they had departed to their
homes, I passed the night sleepless from my excessive longing towards
it, and neither food nor drink was pleasant to me. A few days after, my
uncles prepared to journey thither, and I wept before my father that I
might go with them, so that he prepared a stock of merchandise for me,
and I departed in their company; but he said to them, Suffer him not to
enter Egypt, but leave him at Damascus, that he may there sell his
merchandise.



I took leave of my father, and we set forth from El-Moil, and continued
our journey until we arrived at Aleppo, where we remained some days;
after which we proceeded thence until we came to Damascus; and we beheld
it to be a city with trees and rivers and fruits and birds, as though it
were a paradise, containing fruits of every kind. We took lodgings in
one of the Khans, and my uncles remained there until they had sold and
bought; and they also sold my merchandise, gaining, for every piece of
silver, five, so that I rejoiced at my profit. My uncles then left me,
and repaired to Egypt, and I remained, and took up my abode in a
handsome a'ah, such as the tongue cannot describe; the monthly rent of
which was two pieces of gold.

Here I indulged myself with eating and drinking, squandering away the
money that was in my possession; and as I was sitting one day at the
door of the a'ah, a damsel approached me, attired in clothing of the
richest description, such as I had never seen surpassed in costliness,
and I invited her to come in; whereupon, without hesitation, she
entered; and I was delighted at her compliance, and closed the door upon
us both. She then uncovered her face, and took off her izar, and I found
her to be so surprisingly beautiful that love for her took possession of
my heart: so I went and brought a repast consisting of the most
delicious viands and fruit and everything else that was requisite for
her entertainment, and we ate and sported together; after which, we
drank till we were intoxicated, and fell asleep, and so we remained
until the morning, when I handed her ten pieces of gold; but she swore
that she would not accept them from me, and said, Expect me again, O my
beloved, after three days: at the hour of sunset I will be with thee:
and do thou prepare for us, with these pieces of gold, a repast similar
to this which we have just enjoyed. She then gave me ten pieces of gold,
and took leave of me, and departed, taking my reason with her. And after
the three days had expired, she came again, decked with embroidered
stuffs and ornaments and other attire more magnificent than those which
she wore on the former occasion. I had prepared for her what was
required previously to her arrival; so we now ate and drank and fell
asleep as before; and in the morning she gave me again ten pieces of
gold, promising to return to me after three more days. I therefore made
ready what was requisite, and after the three days she came attired in a
dress still more magnificent than the first and second, and said to me,
O my master, am I beautiful?--Yea, verily, I answered.--Wilt thou give
me leave, she rejoined, to bring with me a damsel more beautiful than
myself, and younger than I, that she may sport with us, and we may make
merry with her? For she hath requested that she may accompany me, and
pass the night in frolicking with us.--And so saying, she gave me twenty
pieces of gold, desiring me to prepare a more plentiful repast, on
account of the lady who was to come with her; after which, she bade me
farewell, and departed.

Accordingly, on the fourth day, I procured what was requisite, as usual,
and soon after sunset she came, accompanied by a female wrapped in an
izar, and they entered, and seated themselves. I was rejoiced, and I
lighted the candles, and welcomed them with joy and exultation. They
then took off their outer garments, and when the new damsel uncovered
her face, I perceived that she was like the full moon: I had never
beheld a person more beautiful. I arose immediately, and placed before
them the food and drink, and we ate and drank, while I continued
caressing the new damsel, and filling the wine-cup for her, and drinking
with her: but the first lady was affected with a secret jealousy.--By
Allah, she said, verily this girl is beautiful! Is she not more charming
than I?--Yea, indeed, I answered.--Soon after this, I fell asleep, and
when I awoke in the morning, I found my hand defiled with blood, and,
opening my eyes, perceived that the sun had risen; so I attempted to
rouse the damsel, my new companion, whereupon her head rolled from her
body. The other damsel was gone, and I concluded, therefore, that she
had done this from her jealousy; and after reflecting a while, I arose,
and took off my clothes, and dug a hole in the a'ah, in which I
deposited the murdered damsel, afterwards covering her remains with
earth, and replacing the marble pavement as it was before. I then
dressed myself again, and, taking the remainder of my money, went forth,
and repaired to the owner of the a'ah, and paid him a year's rent,
saying to him, I am about to journey to my uncles in Egypt.

So I departed to Egypt, where I met with my uncles, and they were
rejoiced to see me. I found that they had concluded the sale of their
merchandise, and they said to me, What is the cause of thy coming? I
answered, I had a longing desire to be with you, and feared that my
money would not suffice me.--For a year I remained with them, enjoying
the pleasures of Egypt and its Nile; and I dipped my hand into the
residue of my money, and expended it prodigally in eating and drinking
until near the time of my uncles' departure, when I fled from them: so
they said, Probably, he hath gone before us, and returned to
Damascus:--and they departed. I then came forth from my concealment, and
remained in Cairo three years, squandering away my money until scarcely
any of it remained: but meanwhile I sent every year the rent of the
a'ah at Damascus to its owner: and after the three years my heart
became contracted, for nothing remained in my possession but the rent
for the year.

I therefore journeyed back to Damascus, and alighted at the a'ah. The
owner was rejoiced to see me, and I entered it, and cleansed it of the
blood of the murdered damsel, and, removing a cushion, I found, beneath
this, the necklace that she had worn that night. I took it up and
examined it, and wept a while. After this I remained in the house two
days, and on the third day I entered the bath, and changed my clothes. I
now had no money left; and I went one day to the market, where (the
Devil suggesting it to me, in order to accomplish the purpose of
destiny) I handed the necklace of jewels to a broker; and he rose to me,
and seated me by his side: then having waited until the market was
replenished, he took it, and announced it for sale secretly, without my
knowledge. The price bidden for it amounted to two thousand pieces of
gold; but he came to me and said, This necklace is of brass, of the
counterfeit manufacture of the Franks, and its price hath amounted to a
thousand pieces of silver. I answered him, Yes; we had made it for a
woman, merely to laugh at her, and my wife has inherited it, and we
desire to sell it: go, therefore, and receive the thousand pieces of
silver. Now when the broker heard this, he perceived that the affair was
suspicious, and went and gave the necklace to the chief of the market,
who took it to the Walee, and said to him, This necklace was stolen from
me, and we have found the thief, clad in the dress of the sons of the
merchants. And before I knew what had happened, the officers had
surrounded me, and they took me to the Walee, who questioned me
respecting the necklace. I told him, therefore, the same story that I
had told to the broker; but he laughed, and said, This is not the
truth:--and instantly his people stripped me of my outer clothing, and
beat me with mira'ahs all over my body, until, through the torture that
I suffered from the blows, I said, I stole it;--reflecting that it was
better I should say I stole it, than confess that its owner was murdered
in my abode; for then they would kill me to avenge her: and as soon as I
had said so, they cut off my hand, and scalded the stump with boiling
oil, and I swooned away. They then gave me to drink some
wine, by swallowing which I recovered my senses; and I took my amputated
hand, and returned to the a'ah; but its owner said to me, Since this
hath happened to thee, leave the a'ah, and look for another abode; for
thou art accused of an unlawful act.--O my master, I replied, give me
two or three days' delay that I may seek for a lodging:--and he assented
to this, and departed and left me. So I remained alone, and sat weeping,
and saying, How can I return to my family with my hand cut off? He who
cut it off knoweth not that I am innocent: perhaps, then, God will bring
about some event for my relief.



I sat weeping violently; and when the owner of the a'ah had departed
from me, excessive grief overcame me, and I was sick for two days; and
on the third day, suddenly the owner of the a'ah came to me, with some
officers of the police, and the chief of the market, and accused me
again of stealing the necklace. So I went out to them, and said, What is
the news?--whereupon, without granting me a moment's delay, they bound
my arms behind me, and put a chain around my neck, saying to me, The
necklace which was in thy possession hath proved to be the property of
the governor of Damascus, its Wezeer and its Ruler: it hath been lost
from the governor's house for a period of three years, and with it was
his daughter.--When I heard these words from them, my limbs trembled,
and I said within myself, They will kill me! My death is inevitable! By
Allah, I must relate my story to the governor; and if he please he will
kill me, or if he please he will pardon me.--And when we arrived at the
governor's abode, and they had placed me before him, and he beheld me,
he said, Is this he who stole the necklace and went out to sell it?
Verily ye have cut off his hand wrongfully.--He then ordered that the
chief of the market should be imprisoned, and said to him, Give to this
person the compensatory fine for his hand, or I will hang
thee and seize all thy property. And he called out to his attendants,
who took him and dragged him away.

I was now left with the governor alone, after they had, by his
permission, loosed the chain from my neck, and untied the cords which
bound my arms; and the governor, looking towards me, said to me, O my
son, tell me thy story, and speak truth. How did this necklace come into
thy possession?--So I replied, O my lord, I will tell thee the
truth:--and I related to him all that had happened to me with the first
damsel, and how she had brought to me the second, and murdered her from
jealousy; on hearing which, he shook his head, and covered his face with
his handkerchief, and wept. Then looking towards me, he said, Know, O my
son, that the elder damsel was my daughter: I kept her closely; and when
she had attained a fit age for marriage, I sent her to the son of her
uncle in Cairo; but he died, and she returned to me, having learnt
habits of profligacy from the inhabitants of that city: so
she visited thee four times; and on the fourth occasion, she brought to
thee her younger sister. They were sisters by the same mother, and much
attached to each other; and when the event which thou hast related
occurred to the elder, she imparted her secret to her sister, who asked
my permission to go out with her; after which the elder returned alone;
and when I questioned her respecting her sister, I found her weeping
for her, and she answered, I know no tidings of her:--but she afterwards
informed her mother, secretly, of the murder which she had committed;
and her mother privately related the affair to me; and she continued to
weep for her incessantly, saying, By Allah, I will not cease to weep for
her until I die. Thy account, O my son, is true; for I knew the affair
before thou toldest it me. See then, O my son, what hath happened: and
now I request of thee that thou wilt not oppose me in that which I am
about to say; and it is this:--I desire to marry thee to my youngest
daughter; for she is not of the same mother as they were: she
is a virgin, and I will receive from thee no dowry, but will assign to
you both an allowance; and thou shalt be to me as an own son.--I
replied, Let it be as thou desirest, O my master. How could I expect to
attain unto such happiness?--The governor then sent immediately a
courier to bring the property which my father had left me (for he had
died since my departure from him), and now I am living in the utmost
affluence.

I wondered, said the Jew, at his history; and after I had remained with
him three days, he gave me a large sum of money; and I left him, to set
forth on a journey; and, arriving in this your country, my residence
here pleased me, and I experienced this which hath happened to me with
the humpback.

The King, when he had heard this story, said, This is not more wonderful
than the story of the humpback, and ye must all of you be hanged, and
especially the tailor, who is the source of all the mischief. But he
afterwards added, O tailor, if thou tell me a story more wonderful than
that of the humpback, I will forgive you your offences. So the tailor
advanced, and said,--