THE BARBER'S STORY OF HIS SIXTH BROTHER

My sixth brother (Shaali), O Prince of the Faithful, had his lips cut
off. He was in a state of extreme poverty, possessing nothing of the
goods of this perishable world; and he went forth one day to seek for
something with which to stay his departing spirit, and on his way he
beheld a handsome house, with a wide and lofty vestibule, at the door of
which were servants, commanding and forbidding; whereupon he inquired of
one of the persons standing there, who answered, This house belongeth to
a man of the sons of the Barmekees. My brother, therefore,
advanced to the door-keepers, and begged them to give him something; and
they said, Enter the door of the house, and thou wilt obtain what thou
desirest of its master. So he entered the vestibule, and proceeded
through it a while until he arrived at a mansion of the utmost beauty
and elegance, having a garden in the midst of it, unsurpassed in beauty
by anything that had ever been seen: its floors were paved with marble,
and its curtains were hanging around. He knew not in which direction to
go; but advanced to the upper extremity, and there he beheld a man of
handsome countenance and beard, who, on seeing my brother, rose to him,
and welcomed him, inquiring respecting his circumstances. He accordingly
informed him that he was in want; and when the master of the house heard
his words, he manifested excessive grief, and, taking hold of his own
clothes, rent them, and exclaimed, Am I in the city, and thou in it
hungry? It is a thing that I cannot endure!--Then promising him every
kind of happiness, he said, Thou must stay and partake of my salt. But
my brother replied, O my master, I have not patience to wait; for I am
in a state of extreme hunger.

Upon this, the master of the house called out, Boy, bring the basin and
ewer!--and he said, O my guest, advance, and wash thy hand. He then
performed the same motions as if he were washing his hand; and called to
his attendants to bring the table; whereupon they began to come and go
as though they were preparing it; after which the master of the house
took my brother, and sat down with him at this imaginary table, and
proceeded to move his hands and lips as if he were eating; saying to my
brother, Eat, and be not ashamed, for thou art hungry, and I know how
thou art suffering from the violence of thy hunger. My brother,
therefore, made the same motions, as if he also were eating, while his
host said to him, Eat, and observe this bread and its whiteness. To
this, my brother at first made no reply; but observed in his own mind,
Verily this is a man who loveth to jest with others:--so he said to him,
O my master, in my life I have never seen bread more beautifully white
than this, or any of sweeter taste:--on which the host rejoined, This
was made by a female slave of mine whom I purchased for five hundred
pieces of gold. He then called out, Boy, bring to us the
sikbaj, the like of which is not found among the dishes of
Kings!--and, addressing my brother, he said, Eat, O my guest; for thou
art hungry, vehemently so, and in absolute want of food. So my brother
began to twist about his mouth, and to chew, as in eating. The master of
the house now proceeded to demand different kinds of viands, one after
another; and, though nothing was brought, he continued ordering my
brother to eat. Next he called out, Boy, place before us the chickens
stuffed with pistachio-nuts:--and said to his guest, Eat of that which
thou hast never tasted the like.--O my master, replied my brother,
verily this dish hath not its equal in sweetness of flavour:--and the
host, thereupon, began to put his hand to my brother's mouth as though
he were feeding him with morsels; and proceeded to enumerate to him the
various different kinds of viands, and to describe their several
excellencies; while his hunger so increased that he longed for a cake of
barley-bread. The master of the house then said to him, Hast thou tasted
anything more delicious than the spices in these dishes?--No, O my
master, answered my brother.--Eat more then, resumed the host; and be
not ashamed.--I have eaten enough of the meats, replied the guest. So
the man of the house called to his attendants to bring the sweets; and
they moved their hands about in the air as if they were bringing them;
whereupon the host said to my brother, Eat of this dish; for it is
excellent; and of these aaif, by my life! and take this one
before the sirup runs from it.--May I never be deprived of thee, O my
master! exclaimed my brother, proceeding to inquire of him respecting
the abundance of musk in the aaif.--This, answered the host, is my
usual custom in my house: they always put for me, in each of the aaif,
a mithal of musk, and half a mithal of ambergris.--All
this time my brother was moving his head and mouth, and rolling about
his tongue between his cheeks, as if he were enjoying the sweets. After
this, the master of the house called out to his attendants, Bring the
dried fruits!--and again they moved about their hands in the air as
though they were doing what he ordered; when he said to my brother, Eat
of these almonds, and of these walnuts, and of these raisins;--and so
on; enumerating the various kinds of dried fruits; and added again, Eat,
and be not ashamed.--O my master, replied my brother, I have had enough,
and have not power to eat anything more:--but the host rejoined, If thou
desire, O my guest, to eat more, and to delight thyself with
extraordinary dainties, by Allah! by Allah! remain not hungry.

My brother now reflected upon his situation, and upon the manner in
which this man was jesting with him, and said within himself, By Allah,
I will do to him a deed that shall make him repent before God of these
actions! The man of the house next said to his attendants, Bring us the
wine:--and, as before, they made the same motions with their hands in
the air as if they were doing what he commanded; after which he
pretended to hand to my brother a cup, saying, Take this cup, for it
will delight thee:--and his guest replied, O my master, this is of thy
bounty:--and he acted with his hand as though he were drinking it.--Hath
it pleased thee? said the host.--O my master, answered my brother, I
have never seen anything more delicious than this wine.--Drink then,
rejoined the master of the house, and may it be attended with benefit
and health:--and he himself pretended to drink, and to hand a second cup
to my brother, who, after he had affected to drink it, feigned himself
intoxicated, and, taking his host unawares, raised his hand until the
whiteness of his arm-pit appeared, and struck him such a slap upon his
neck that the chamber rang at the blow; and this he followed by a second
blow; whereupon the man exclaimed, What is this, thou vilest of the
creation?--O my master, answered my brother, I am thy slave, whom thou
hast graciously admitted into thine abode, and thou hast fed him with
thy provisions, and treated him with old wine, and he hath become
intoxicated, and committed an outrage upon thee; but thou art of too
exalted dignity to be angry with him for his ignorance.

When the master of the house heard these words of my brother, he uttered
a loud laugh, and said to him, Verily for a long time have I made game
of men, and jested with all persons accustomed to joking and rudeness,
but I have not seen among them any who could endure this trick, nor any
who had sagacity to conform to all my actions, except thee: now,
therefore, I pardon thee; and be thou my companion in reality, and never
relinquish me. He then gave orders to bring a number of the dishes above
mentioned, and he and my brother ate together to satisfaction; after
which they removed to the drinking-chamber, where female slaves like so
many moons sang all kinds of melodies, and played on all kinds of
musical instruments. There they drank until intoxication overcame them:
the master of the house treated my brother as a familiar friend, became
greatly attached to him, and clad him with a costly dress; and on the
following morning they resumed their feasting and drinking. Thus they
continued to live for a period of twenty years: the man then died, and
the Sulan seized upon his property, and took possession of
it.

My brother, upon this, went forth from the city, a fugitive; and upon
his way, a party of Arabs came upon him. They made him a
captive; and the man who captured him tortured him with beating, and
said to him, By Allah, purchase thyself of me by wealth, or I will kill
thee:--but my brother, weeping, replied, By Allah, I possess nothing, O
Sheykh of the Arabs; nor do I know the means of obtaining any property:
I am thy captive; I have fallen into thy hands, and do with me what thou
wilt. And immediately the tyrannical Bedawee drew forth from his girdle
a broad-bladed knife (such as, if plunged into the neck of a camel,
would cut it across from one jugular vein to the other), and, taking it
in his right hand, approached my poor brother, and cut off with it his
lips; still urging his demand.--Now this Bedawee had a handsome wife,
who, when he was absent, used to manifest a strong affection for my
brother; though he observed a proper decorum towards her, fearing God
(whose name be exalted!); and it happened, one day, that she had called
him, and seated him with her; but while they were together, lo, her
husband came in upon them; and when he beheld my brother, he exclaimed,
Wo to thee, thou base wretch! Dost thou desire now to corrupt my
wife?--Then drawing his knife, he inflicted upon him another cruel
wound; after which he mounted him upon a camel, and, having cast him
upon a mountain, left him there, and went his way. Some travellers,
however, passed by him, and when they discovered him, they gave him food
and drink, and acquainted me with his case: so I went forth to him, and
conveyed him back into the city, and allotted him a sufficient
maintenance.



Now I have come unto thee, O Prince of the Faithful, continued the
barber, and feared to return to my house without relating to thee these
facts; for to neglect doing so had been an error. Thus thou hast seen
that, although having six brothers, I am of a more upright character
than they.--But when the Prince of the Faithful had heard my story, and
all that I had related to him respecting my brothers, he laughed, and
said, Thou hast spoken truth, O amit (O silent man); thou art a person
of few words, and devoid of impertinence; now, however, depart from this
city, and take up thine abode in another. So he banished me from
Baghdad; and I journeyed through various countries, and traversed many
regions, until I heard of his death, and of the succession of another
Khaleefeh; when, returning to my city, I met with this young man, unto
whom I did the best of deeds, and who, had it not been for me, had been
slain: yet he hath accused me of that which is not in my character; for
all that he hath related of me, with respect to impertinence, and
loquacity, and dulness, and want of taste, is false, O people.


CONTINUATION OF THE STORY TOLD BY THE TAILOR.

The tailor then proceeded thus:--When we heard the story of the barber,
and were convinced of his impertinence and loquacity, and that the young
man had been treated unjustly by him, we seized hold upon him, and put
him in confinement, and, seating ourselves to keep watch over him, ate
and drank; and the feast was finished in the most agreeable manner. We
remained sitting together until the call to afternoon-prayers, when I
went forth, and returned to my house; but my wife looked angrily at me,
and said, Thou hast been all the day enjoying thy pleasure while I have
been sitting at home sorrowful; now if thou go not forth with me and
amuse me for the remainder of the day, thy refusal will be the cause of
my separation from thee. So I took her and went out with her, and we
amused ourselves until nightfall, when, returning home, we met this
humpback, full of drink, and repeating verses; upon which I invited him
to come home with us, and he consented. I then went forth to buy some
fried fish, and having bought it and returned, we sat down to eat; and
my wife took a morsel of bread and a piece of fish, and put them into
his mouth, and choked him, so that he died; whereupon I took him up, and
contrived to throw him into the house of this physician, and he
contrived to throw him into the house of the steward, and the steward
contrived to throw him in the way of the broker.--This is the story of
what happened to me yesterday. Is it not more wonderful than that of the
humpback?


CONTINUATION OF THE STORY OF THE HUMPBACK.

When the King had heard this story, he ordered certain of his
chamberlains to go with the tailor, and to bring the barber; saying to
them, His presence is indispensable, that I may hear his talk, and it
may be the cause of the deliverance of you all: then we will bury this
humpback decently in the earth, for he hath been dead since yesterday;
and we will make him a monument around his grave, since he hath been the
occasion of our acquaintance with these wonderful stories.

The chamberlains and the tailor soon came back, after having gone to the
place of confinement and brought the barber, whom they placed before the
King; and when the King beheld him, he saw him to be an old man, passed
his ninetieth year, of dark countenance, and white beard and eyebrows,
with small ears, and long nose, and a haughty aspect. The King laughed
at the sight of him, and said to him, O silent man, I desire that thou
relate to me somewhat of thy stories.--O King of the age, replied the
barber, what is the occasion of the presence of this Christian and this
Jew and this Muslim, and this humpback lying dead among you; and what is
the reason of this assembly?--Wherefore dost thou ask this? said the
King. The barber answered, I ask it in order that the King may know me
to be no impertinent person, nor one who meddleth with that which doth
not concern him, and that I am free from the loquacity of which they
accuse me: for I am fortunate in my characteristic appellation, since
they have surnamed me E-amit; and, as the poet hath said,--

  Seldom hast thou seen a person honoured with a surname,
    but thou wilt find, if thou search, that his character
    is expressed by it.

The King therefore said, Explain to the barber the case of this
humpback, and what happened to him yesterday evening, and explain to him
also what the Christian hath related, and the Jew and the steward and
the tailor. So they repeated to him the stories of all these persons.

The barber, thereupon, shook his head, saying, By Allah, this is a
wonderful thing! Uncover this humpback, that I may examine him.--And
they did so. He then seated himself at his head, and, taking it up,
placed it upon his lap, and looked at his face, and laughed so violently
that he fell backwards, exclaiming, For every death there is a cause;
and the death of this humpback is most wonderful: it is worthy of being
registered in the records, that posterity may be instructed by this
event!--The King, astonished at his words, said, O amit, explain to us
the reason of thy saying this.--O King, replied the barber, by thy
beneficence, life is yet in the humpback! He then drew forth from his
bosom a pot containing some ointment, and with this he anointed the neck
of the humpback; after which he covered it up until it perspired; when
he took forth an iron forceps, and put it down his throat, and extracted
the piece of fish with its bone, and all the people saw them. The
humpback now sprang upon his feet, and sneezed, and, recovering his
consciousness, drew his hands over his face, and exclaimed, There is no
Deity but God! Moammad is God's Apostle! God bless and save him!--and
all who were present were astonished at the sight, and the King laughed
until he became insensible; as did also the other spectators. The King
exclaimed, By Allah, this accident is wonderful! I have never witnessed
anything more strange!--and added, O Muslims! O assembly of soldiers!
have ye ever in the course of your lives seen any one die and after
that come to life? But had not God blessed him with this barber, the
humpback had been to-day numbered among the people of the other world;
for the barber hath been the means of restoring him to life.--They
replied, This is indeed a wonderful thing!

The King then gave orders to record this event; and when they had done
so, he placed the record in the royal library; and he bestowed dresses
of honour upon the Jew and the Christian and the steward; upon each of
them, a costly dress: the tailor he appointed to be his own tailor,
granting him regular allowances, and reconciling him and the humpback
with each other: the humpback he honoured with a rich and beautiful
dress, and with similar allowances, and appointed him his cup-companion;
and upon the barber also he conferred the like favours, rewarding him
with a costly dress of honour, regular allowances, and a fixed salary,
and appointing him state-barber, and his own cup-companion: so they all
lived in the utmost happiness and comfort until they were visited by the
terminator of delights and the separator of friends.