She replied, With pleasure:--and, taking a knife upon which were
engraved some Hebrew names, marked with it a circle in the midst of the
palace. Within this she wrote certain names and talismans, and then she
pronounced invocations, and uttered unintelligible words; and soon the
palace around us became immersed in gloom to such a degree, that we
thought the whole world was overspread; and lo, the 'Efreet appeared
before us in a most hideous shape, with hands like winnowing-forks, and
legs like masts, and eyes like burning torches; so that we were
terrified at him. The King's daughter exclaimed, No welcome to thee!--to
which the 'Efreet, assuming the form of a lion, replied, Thou traitress,
how is it that thou hast broken thine oath? Did we not swear that we
would not oppose one another?--Thou wretch, said she, when didst thou
receive an oath?--The 'Efreet, still in the form of a lion, then
exclaimed, Take what awaiteth thee!--and, opening his mouth, rushed upon
the lady: but she instantly plucked a hair from her head and muttered
with her lips, whereupon the hair became converted into a piercing
sword, with which she struck the lion, and he was cleft in twain by the
blow; but his head became changed into a scorpion. The lady immediately
transformed herself into an enormous serpent, and crept after the
execrable wretch in the shape of a scorpion, and a sharp contest ensued
between them; after which, the scorpion became an eagle, and the
serpent, changing to a vulture, pursued the eagle for a length of time.
The latter then transformed himself into a black cat, and the King's
daughter became a wolf, and they fought together long and fiercely, till
the cat, seeing himself overcome, changed himself into a large red
pomegranate, which fell into a pool; but, the wolf pursuing it, it
ascended into the air, and then fell upon the pavement of the palace,
and broke in pieces, its grains becoming scattered, each apart from the
others, and all spread about the whole space of ground enclosed by the
palace. The wolf, upon this, transformed itself into a cock, in order to
pick up the grains, and not leave one of them; but, according to the
decree of fate, one grain remained hidden by the side of the pool of the
fountain. The cock began to cry, and flapped its wings, and made a sign
to us with its beak; but we understood not what it would say. It then
uttered at us such a cry, that we thought the palace had fallen down
upon us; and it ran about the whole of the ground, until it saw the
grain that had lain hid by the side of the pool, when it pounced upon
it, to pick it up; but it fell into the midst of the water, and became
transformed into a fish, and sank into the water; upon which the cock
became a fish of a larger size, and plunged in after the other. For a
while it was absent from our sight; but, at length, we heard a loud cry,
and trembled at the sound; after which, the 'Efreet rose as a flame of
fire, casting fire from his mouth, and fire and smoke from his eyes and
nostrils: the King's daughter also became as a vast body of fire; and we
would have plunged into the water from fear of our being burnt and
destroyed; but suddenly the 'Efreet cried out from within the fire, and
came towards us upon the leewan, blowing fire at our faces.
The lady, however, overtook him, and blew fire in like manner in his
face; and some sparks struck us both from her and from him: her sparks
did us no harm; but one from him struck me in my eye, and destroyed it,
I being still in the form of an ape; and a spark from him reached the
face of the King, and burned the lower half, with his beard and mouth,
and struck out his lower teeth: another spark also fell upon the breast
of the eunuch; who was burnt, and died immediately. We expected
destruction, and gave up all hope of preserving our lives; but while we
were in this state, a voice exclaimed, God is most great! God is most
great! He hath conquered and aided, and abandoned the denier of the
faith of Moammad, the chief of mankind!--The person from
whom this voice proceeded was the King's daughter: she had burnt the
'Efreet; and when we looked towards him, we perceived that he had become
a heap of ashes.