COMMENCING WITH PART OF THE THIRTY-SECOND NIGHT, AND ENDING WITH PART OF
THIS THIRTY-SIXTH.

THE STORY OF NOOR-ED-DEEN AND ENEES-EL-JELEES.

There was, in El-Barah, a certain King who loved the poor and indigent,
and regarded his subjects with benevolence; he bestowed of his wealth
upon him who believed in Moammad (God bless and save him!) and was such
as one of the poets who have written of him hath thus described:--

  He used his lances as pens; and the hearts of his enemies, as paper;
    their blood being his ink:
  And hence, I imagine, our forefathers applied to the lance the term
    Khaeeyeh.

The name of this King was Moammad the son of Suleyman Ez-Zeynee; and he
had two Wezeers; one of whom was named El-Mo'een the son of
Sawee; and the other, El-Fal the son of Khaan. El-Fal the
son of Khaan was the most generous of the people of his age, upright in
conduct, so that all hearts agreed in loving him, and the wise complied
with his counsel, and all the people supplicated for him length of life;
for he was a person of auspicious aspect, a preventer of evil
and mischief: but the Wezeer El-Mo'een the son of Sawee hated others,
and loved not good; he was a man of inauspicious aspect; and in the same
degree that the people loved Fal-ed-Deen the son of Khaan, so did they
abhor El-Mo'een the son of Sawee, in accordance with the decree of the
Almighty.

Now the King Moammad the son of Suleyman Ez-Zeynee was sitting one day
upon his throne, surrounded by the officers of his court, and he called
to his Wezeer El-Fal the son of Khaan, and said to him, I desire a
female slave unsurpassed in beauty by any in her age, of perfect
loveliness, and exquisite symmetry, and endowed with all praiseworthy
qualities.--Such as this, replied his courtiers, is not to be found for
less than ten thousand pieces of gold. And the Sulan thereupon called
out to the treasurer, saying, Carry ten thousand pieces of gold to the
house of El-Fal the son of Khaan. So the treasurer did as he
commanded, and the Wezeer departed, after the Sulan had ordered him to
repair every day to the market, and to commission the brokers to procure
what he had described, and had commanded also that no female slave of a
greater price than one thousand pieces of gold should be sold without
having been shewn to the Wezeer.

The brokers, therefore, sold no female slave without shewing her to him,
and he complied with the King's command, and thus he continued to do for
a considerable time, no slave pleasing him: but on a certain day, one of
the brokers came to the mansion of the Wezeer El-Fal, and found that he
had mounted to repair to the palace of the King; and he laid hold upon
his stirrup, and repeated these two verses:--

  O thou who hast reanimated what was rotten in the state! Thou art
    the Wezeer ever aided by Heaven.
  Thou hast revived the noble qualities that were extinct among men.
    May thy conduct never cease to be approved by God!

He then said, O my master, the female slave for the procuring of whom
the noble mandate was issued hath arrived. The Wezeer replied, Bring her
hither to me. So the man returned, and, after a short absence, came
again, accompanied by a damsel of elegant stature, high-bosomed, with
black eyelashes, and smooth cheek, and slender waist, and large hips,
clad in the handsomest apparel; the moisture of her lips was sweeter
than sirup; her figure put to shame the branches of the Oriental willow;
and her speech was more soft than the zephyr passing over the flowers of
the garden; as one of her describers hath thus expressed:--

  Her skin is like silk, and her speech is soft, neither redundant
    nor deficient:
  Her eyes, God said to them, Be,--and they were, affecting men's
    hearts with the potency of wine.
  May my love for her grow more warm each night, and cease not
    until the day of judgment!
  The locks on her brow are dark as night, while her forehead shines
    like the gleam of morning.

When the Wezeer beheld her, she pleased him extremely, and he looked
towards the broker, and said to him, What is the price of this damsel?
The broker answered, The price bidden for her hath amounted to ten
thousand pieces of gold, and her owner hath sworn that this sum doth not
equal the cost of the chickens which she hath eaten, nor the cost of the
dresses which she hath bestowed upon her teachers; for she hath learnt
writing and grammar and lexicology, and the interpretation of the
ur-an, and the fundamentals of law and religion, and medicine, and the
computation of the calendar, and the art of playing upon musical
instruments. The Wezeer then said, Bring to me her master:--and the
broker immediately brought him; and lo, he was a foreigner, who had
lived so long that time had reduced him to bones and skin, as the poet
hath said,--

  How hath time made me to tremble! For time is powerful and severe.
  I used to walk without being weary; but now I am weary and do not walk.

And the Wezeer said to him, Art thou content to receive for this damsel
ten thousand pieces of gold from the Sulan Moammad the son of Suleyman
Ez-Zeynee? The foreigner answered, As she is for the Sulan, it is
incumbent on me to give her as a present to him, without
price. So the Wezeer, upon this, ordered that the money
should be brought, and then weighed the pieces of gold for the
foreigner; after which, the slave-broker addressed the Wezeer, and said,
With the permission of our lord the Wezeer, I will speak.--Impart what
thou hast to say, replied the Wezeer.--It is my opinion, then, said the
broker, that thou shouldst not take up this damsel to the Sulan
to-day; for she hath just arrived from her journey, and the change of
air hath affected her, and the journey hath fatigued her; but rather let
her remain with thee in thy palace ten days, that she may take rest, and
her beauty will improve: then cause her to be taken into the bath, and
attire her in clothes of the handsomest description, and go up with her
to the Sulan: so shalt thou experience more abundant good fortune. And
the Wezeer considered the advice of the slave-broker, and approved it.
He therefore took her into his palace, and gave her a private apartment
to herself, allotting her every day what she required of food and drink
and other supplies, and she continued a while in this state of
enjoyment.



Now the Wezeer El-Fal had a son like the shining full moon, with
brilliant countenance, and red cheek, marked with a mole like a globule
of ambergris, and with grey down. The youth knew not of this damsel, and
his father had charged her, saying, Know that I have purchased thee for
the King Moammad the son of Suleyman Ez-Zeynee, and that I have a son
who hath not left a girl in the quarter without making love to her:
therefore keep thyself concealed from him, and beware of shewing him thy
face, or suffering him to hear thy voice. The damsel replied, I hear and
obey:--and he left her and departed. And it happened, as fate had
ordained, that she went one day into the bath which was in the house,
and, after certain of the female slaves had bathed her, she attired
herself in rich apparel, and her beauty and loveliness increased in
consequence. She then went in to the Wezeer's wife, and kissed her hand,
and she said to her, May it be favourable, O Enees-el-Jelees!
How didst thou find this bath?--O my mistress, she answered, I wanted
nothing but thy presence there. And upon this, the mistress of the house
said to the female slaves, Arise, and let us go into the bath. And they
complied with her command, and went, accompanied by their mistress, who
first charged two young slave-girls to keep the door of the private
apartment in which was Enees-el-Jelees, saying to them, Suffer no one to
go in to the damsel:--and they replied, We hear and obey. But while
Enees-el-Jelees was sitting in her chamber, lo, the Wezeer's son, whose
name was 'Alee Noor-ed-Deen, came in, and asked after his mother and the
family. The two girls answered, They are gone into the bath. Now the
damsel Enees-el-Jelees heard the speech of 'Alee Noor-ed-Deen as she sat
in her chamber, and she said within herself, I wonder what this youth is
like, of whom the Wezeer hath told me that he hath not left a girl in
the quarter without making love to her: by Allah, I have a desire to see
him. She then rose upon her feet, fresh as she was from the bath, and,
approaching the door of the chamber, looked at 'Alee Noor-ed-Deen, and
beheld him to be a youth like the full moon. The sight of him occasioned
her a thousand sighs; and a look from the youth, at her, affected him
also in the same manner. Each was caught in the snare of the other's
love, and the youth approached the two slave-girls, and cried out at
them; whereupon they fled from before him, and stopped at a distance,
looking to see what he would do. He then advanced to the door of the
chamber, and, opening it, went in, and said to the damsel, Art thou she
whom my father hath purchased for me? She answered, Yes. And upon this,
the youth, who was in a state of intoxication, went up to her, and
embraced her, while she, in like manner, threw her arms around his neck,
and kissed him. But the two slave-girls, having seen their young master
enter the chamber of the damsel Enees-el-Jelees, cried out. The youth,
therefore, soon ran forth, and fled for safety, fearing the consequence
of his intrusion; and when the mistress of the house heard the cry of
the two slave-girls, she came out dripping from the bath, saying, What
is the cause of this cry in the house? And when she drew near to the
two slave-girls whom she had placed at the door of the private chamber,
she said to them, Wo to you! What is the matter?--They answered, as soon
as they beheld her, Our master 'Alee Noor-ed-Deen came to us and beat
us, and we fled from him, and he went into the chamber of
Enees-el-Jelees, and when we cried out to thee he fled. The mistress of
the house then went to Enees-el-Jelees, and said to her, What is the
news?--O my mistress, she answered, as I was sitting here, a youth of
handsome person came in to me, and said to me, Art thou she whom my
father hath purchased for me?--And I answered, Yes.--By Allah, O my
mistress, I believed that what he said was true; and he came up to me
and embraced me, and kissed me three times, and he left me overcome by
his love.

Upon this, the mistress of the house wept, and slapped her face, and her
female slaves did the like, fearing for 'Alee Noor-ed-Deen, lest his
father should slay him; and while they were in this state, lo, the
Wezeer came in, and inquired what had happened. His wife said to him,
Swear that thou wilt listen to that which I shall say. He replied, Well.
So she told him what his son had done; and he mourned, and rent his
clothes, and slapped his face, and plucked his beard. His wife then said
to him, Kill not thyself. I will give thee, of my own property, ten
thousand pieces of gold, her price.--But upon this, he raised his head
towards her, and said to her, Wo to thee! I want not her price; but I
fear the loss of my life and my property.--Wherefore, O my master? she
asked.--Knowest thou not, said he, that we have this enemy El-Mo'een the
son of Sawee? When he heareth of this event, he will repair to the
Sulan, and say to him, Thy Wezeer whom thou imaginest to love thee hath
received from thee ten thousand pieces of gold, and purchased therewith
a female slave such as no one hath seen equalled, and when she pleased
him, he said to his son, Take her; for thou art more worthy of her than
the Sulan:--and he took her; and the damsel is now with him.--Then the
King will say, Thou liest. And he will say to the King, With thy
permission, I will break in upon him suddenly, and bring her to thee.
And he will give him permission to do so: he will therefore make a
sudden attack upon the house, and take the damsel, and conduct her into
the presence of the Sulan, and he will question her, and she will not
be able to deny: he will then say, O my lord, I give thee good counsel,
but I am not in favour with thee:--and the Sulan will make an example
of me, and all the people will make me a gazing-stock, and my life will
be lost.--His wife, however, replied, Acquaint no one; for this thing
hath happened privily: commit, therefore, thine affair unto God, in this
extremity. And upon this, the heart of the Wezeer was quieted, and his
mind was relieved.

Such was the case of the Wezeer.--Now as to Noor-ed-Deen, he feared the
result of his conduct, and so passed each day in the gardens, not
returning to his mother until towards the close of the night: he then
slept in her apartment, and rose before morning without being seen by
any one else. Thus he continued to do so for the space of a month, not
seeing the face of his father; and at length his mother said to his
father, O my master, wilt thou lose the damsel and lose the child? For
if it long continue thus with the youth, he will flee his country.--And
what is to be done? said he. She answered, Sit up this night, and when
he cometh, lay hold upon him, and be reconciled to him, and give him the
damsel; for she loveth him, and he loveth her; and I will give thee her
price. So the Wezeer sat up the whole night, and when his son came, he
laid hold upon him, and would have cut his throat; but his
mother came to his succour, and said to her husband, What dost thou
desire to do unto him? He answered her, I desire to slay him. The youth
then said to his father, Am I of so small account in thy estimation? And
upon this, the eyes of his father filled with tears, and he said to him,
O my son, is the loss of my property and my life of small account with
thee?--Listen, O my father, rejoined the youth:--and he implored his
forgiveness. So the Wezeer rose from the breast of his son, and was
moved with compassion for him; and the youth rose, and kissed his
father's hand; and the Wezeer said, O my son, if I knew that thou
wouldst act equitably to Enees-el-Jelees, I would give her to thee.--O
my father, replied the youth, wherefore should I not act equitably
towards her? And his father said, I charge thee, O my son, that thou
take not a wife to share her place, and that thou do her no injury, nor
sell her. He replied, O my father, I swear to thee that I will neither
take a wife to share her place, nor sell her:--and he promised him by
oaths to act as he had said, and took up his abode with the damsel, and
remained with her a year; and God (whose name be exalted!) caused the
King to forget the affair of the female slave; but the matter became
known to El-Mo'een the son of Sawee; yet he could not speak of it, on
account of the high estimation in which the other Wezeer was held by the
Sulan.



After this year had expired, the Wezeer Fal-ed-Deen the son of Khaan
entered the oath, and came out in a state of excessive perspiration, in
consequence of which the external air smote him, so that he became
confined to his bed, and long remained sleepless; and his malady
continued unremittingly; so he called, thereupon, his son 'Alee
Noor-ed-Deen, and when he came before him, said to him, O my son, verily
the means of life are apportioned, and its period is decreed, and every
soul must drink the cup of death. I have nothing with which to charge
thee but the fear of God, and forethought with regard to the results of
thine actions, and that thou conduct thyself kindly to the damsel
Enees-el-Jelees.--O my father, said the youth, who is like unto thee?
Thou hast been celebrated for virtuous actions, and the praying of the
preachers for thee on the pulpits.--O my son, rejoined the Wezeer, I
hope for the approbation of God, whose name be exalted! And then he
pronounced the two professions of the faith, and uttered a
sigh, and was recorded among the company of the blest. And upon this,
the palace was filled with shrieking, and the news reached the ears of
the Sulan, and the people of the city heard of the death of El-Fal the
son of Khaan, and even the boys in the schools wept for
him. His son 'Alee Noor-ed-Deen arose, and prepared his
funeral, and the Emeers and Wezeers and other officers of the state
attended it, and among them was the Wezeer El-Mo'een the Son of Sawee;
and as the procession passed out from the mansion, one of the mourners
recited these verses:--

  I said to the man who was appointed to wash him,--Would that he had
    yielded obedience to my counsel,--
  Put away from him the water, and wash him with the tears of honour,
    shed in lamentation for him:
  And remove these fragrant substances collected for his corpse,
    and perfume him rather with the odours of his praise:
  And order the noble angels to carry him, in honour. Dost thou
    not behold them attending him?
  Cause not men's necks to be strained by bearing him: enough
    are they laden already by his benefits.

'Alee Noor-ed-Deen for a long time remained in a state of violent grief
for the loss of his father; but as he was sitting one day in his
father's house, a person knocked at the door, and he rose up and opened
it, and lo, there was a man who was one of his father's intimate
companions, and he kissed the hand of Noor-ed-Deen, and said to him, O
my master, he who hath left a son like thee hath not died. This is the
destination of the lord of the first and the last among
mankind. O my master, cheer up thy heart, and give over
mourning.--And upon this, 'Alee Noor-ed-Deen arose, and went to the
guest-chamber, and removed thither all that he required, and his
companions came together to him, and he took again his slave. Ten of the
sons of the merchants became his associates, and he gave entertainment
after entertainment, and began to be lavish with presents. His steward,
therefore, came in to him, and said to him, O my master Noor-ed-Deen,
hast thou not heard the saying, He who expendeth and doth not calculate
is reduced to poverty? This profuse expenditure, and these magnificent
presents, will annihilate the property.--But when 'Alee Noor-ed-Deen
heard these words of his steward, he looked at him, and replied, Of all
that thou hast said to me, I will not attend to one word. How excellent
is the saying of the poet:--

  If I be possessed of wealth and be not liberal, may my hand never
    be extended, nor my foot raised!
  Shew me the avaricious who hath attained glory by his avarice,
    and the munificent who hath died through his munificence.

Know, O Steward, he continued, that if there remain in thy hands what
will suffice for my dinner, thou shalt not burden me with anxiety
respecting my supper.--So the steward left him, and went his way; and
'Alee Noor-ed-Deen resumed his habits of extravagant generosity:
whenever any one of his companions said, Verily this thing is
beautiful!--he would reply, It is a present to thee:--and if any said, O
my master, verily such a house is delightful!--he would reply, It is a
present to thee.

He ceased not to give entertainments to his companions from the
commencement of day, one after another, until he had passed in this
manner a whole year; after which, as he was sitting with them, he heard
the slave-girl recite these two verses:--

  Thou thoughtest well of the days when they went well with thee,
    and fearedst not the evil that destiny was bringing.
  Thy nights were peaceful, and thou wast deceived by them:
    in the midst of their brightness there cometh gloom.

And immediately after, a person knocked at the door: so Noor-ed-Deen
rose, and one of his companions followed him without his knowledge; and
when he opened the door, he beheld his steward, and said to him, What is
the news?--O my master, answered the steward, that which I feared on thy
account hath happened to thee.--How is that? asked Noor-ed-Deen. The
steward answered, Know that there remaineth not of thy property in my
hands, anything equivalent to a piece of silver, or less than a piece of
silver; and these are the accounts of thy expenses, and of thy original
property. When 'Alee Noor-ed-Deen heard these words, he hung down his
head towards the ground, and exclaimed, There is no strength nor power
but in God! And the man who had followed him secretly to pry into his
case, as soon as he heard what the steward told him, returned to his
companions, and said to them, See what ye will do; for 'Alee
Noor-ed-Deen hath become a bankrupt. So when Noor-ed-Deen returned to
them, grief appeared to them in his countenance, and immediately one of
them rose, and, looking towards him, said to him, O my master, I desire
that thou wouldst permit me to depart.--Why thus depart to-day? said
Noor-ed-Deen. His guest answered, My wife is to give birth to a child
this night, and it is impossible for me to be absent from her: I desire,
therefore, to go and see her. And he gave him leave. Then another rose,
and said to him, O my master Noor-ed-Deen, I desire to-day to visit my
brother; for he celebrateth the circumcision of his son. Thus each of
them asked leave of him deceitfully, and went his way, until all had
departed.

So 'Alee Noor-ed-Deen remained alone; and he called his slave-girl, and
said to her, O Enees-el-Jelees, seest thou not what hath befallen me?
And he related to her what the steward had told him. She replied, O my
master, for some nights past, I have been anxious to speak to thee of
this affair; but I heard thee reciting these two verses:--

  When fortune is liberal to thee, be thou liberal to all others
    before she escape from thee:
  For liberality will not annihilate thy wealth when she is favourable;
    nor avarice preserve it when she deserteth thee.

And when I heard thee repeat these words, I was silent, and would not
make any remark to thee.--O Enees-el-Jelees, he rejoined, thou knowest
that I have not expended my wealth but on my companions; and I do not
think that they will abandon me without relief.--By Allah, said she,
they will be of no use to thee. But he said, I will immediately arise
and go to them, and knock at their doors: perhaps I shall obtain from
them something which I will employ as a capital wherewith to trade, and
I will cease from diversion and sport. So he arose instantly, and
proceeded without stopping until he arrived at the by-street in which
his ten companions resided; for they all lived in that same street: and
he advanced to the first door, and knocked; and there came forth to him
a slave-girl, who said to him, Who art thou? He answered, Say to thy
master,--'Alee Noor-ed-Deen is standing at the door, and saith to thee,
Thy slave kisseth thy hands, looking for a favour from thee.--And the
girl entered, and acquainted her master; but he called out to her,
saying, Return, and tell him, He is not here.--The girl, therefore,
returned to Noor-ed-Deen, and said to him, My master, Sir, is not here.
And he went on, saying within myself, If this is a knave, and hath
denied himself, another is not. He then advanced to the next door, and
said as he had before; and the second also denied himself; and
Noor-ed-Deen exclaimed,--

  They are gone, who, if thou stoodest at their door, would bestow
    upon thee the bounty thou desirest.

By Allah, he added, I must try all of them: perchance one of them may
stand me in the place of all the others. And he went round to all the
ten; but found not that one of them would open the door, or shew
himself, or even order him a cake of bread; and he recited the following
verses:--

  A man in prosperity resembleth a tree, around which people flock
    as long as it hath fruit;
  But as soon as it hath dropped all that it bore, they disperse
    from beneath it, and seek another.
  Perdition to all the people of this age! for I find not one man
    of integrity among ten.

He then returned to his slave: his anxiety had increased, and she said
to him, O my master, said I not unto thee that they would not profit
thee?--By Allah, he replied, not one of them shewed me his face.--O my
master, rejoined she, sell of the moveables of the house a little at a
time, and expend the produce. And he did so until he had sold all that
was in the house, and there remained nothing in his possession; and
upon this he looked towards Enees-el-Jelees, and said to her, What shall
we do now?--It is my advice, O my master, she answered, that thou arise
immediately, and take me to the market, and sell me; for thou knowest
that thy father purchased me for ten thousand pieces of gold, and
perhaps God may open to thee a way to obtain a part of this price; and
if God have decreed our reunion, we shall meet again. But he replied, O
Enees-el-Jelees, it is not easy for me to endure thy separation for one
hour.--Nor is the like easy to me, said she: but necessity is imperious.
And upon this, he took Enees-el-Jelees, his tears flowing down his
cheeks, and went and delivered her to the broker, saying to him, Know
the value of that which thou art to cry for sale.--O my master
Noor-ed-Deen, replied the broker, noble qualities are held in
remembrance. Is she not Enees-el-Jelees, whom thy father purchased of me
for ten thousand pieces of gold?--He answered, Yes. And the broker
thereupon went to the merchants; but he found that they had not all yet
assembled; so he waited until the rest had come, and the market was
filled with all varieties of female slaves, Turkish and Greek and
Circassian and Georgian and Abyssinian; and when he beheld its crowded
state, he arose and exclaimed, O merchants! O possessors of wealth!
everything that is round is not a nut; nor is everything long, a banana;
nor is everything that is red, meat; nor is everything white, fat; nor
is everything that is ruddy, wine; nor is everything tawny, a date! O
merchants! this precious pearl, whose value no money can equal, with
what sum will ye open the bidding for her?--And one of the merchants
answered, With four thousand and five hundred pieces of
gold.



But, lo, the Wezeer El-Mo'een the son of Sawee was in the market, and,
seeing 'Alee Noor-ed-Deen standing there, he said within himself, What
doth he want here, having nothing left wherewith to purchase female
slaves? Then casting his eyes around, and hearing the broker as he stood
crying in the market with the merchants around him, he said within
himself, I do not imagine anything else than that he hath become a
bankrupt, and come forth with the slave-girl to sell her; and if this be
the case, how pleasant to my heart! He then called the crier, who
approached him, and kissed the ground before him; and the
Wezeer said to him, I desire this female slave whom thou art crying for
sale. The broker, therefore, being unable to oppose his wish, brought
the slave and placed her before him; and when he beheld her, and
considered her charms, her elegant figure and her soft speech, he was
delighted with her, and said to the broker, To what has the bidding for
her amounted? The broker answered, Four thousand and five hundred pieces
of gold. And as soon as the merchants heard this, not one of them could
bid another piece of silver or of gold; but all of them drew back,
knowing the tyrannical conduct of that Wezeer. El-Mo'een the son of
Sawee then looked towards the broker, and said to him, Why standest thou
still? Take away the slave-girl for me at the price of four thousand and
five hundred pieces of gold, and thou wilt have five hundred for
thyself.--So the broker went to 'Alee Noor-ed-Deen, and said to him, O
my master, the slave-girl is lost to thee without price.--How so? said
Noor-ed-Deen. The broker answered, We opened the bidding for her at four
thousand and five hundred pieces of gold; but this tyrant El-Mo'een the
son of Sawee came into the market, and when he beheld the damsel she
pleased him, and he said to me, Ask her owner if he will agree for four
thousand pieces of gold, and five hundred for thee:--and I doubt not but
he knoweth that the slave belongeth to thee; and if he give thee her
price immediately, it will be through the goodness of God; but I know,
from his injustice, that he will write thee an order upon some of his
agents for the money, and then send to them and desire them to give thee
nothing; and every time that thou shalt go to demand it of them, they
will say to thee, To-morrow we will pay thee:--and they will not cease
to promise thee, and to defer from day to day, notwithstanding thy
pride; and when they are overcome by thy importunity they will say, Give
us the written order:--and as soon as they have received the paper from
thee they will tear it in pieces: so thou wilt lose the price of the
slave.

When Noor-ed-Deen, therefore, heard these words of the broker, he said
to him, What is to be done? The broker answered, I will give thee a
piece of advice, and if thou receive it from me, thou wilt have better
fortune.--What is it? asked Noor-ed-Deen.--That thou come to me
immediately, answered the broker, while I am standing in the midst of
the market, and take the slave-girl from me, and give her a blow with
thy hand, and say to her, Wo to thee! I have expiated my oath that I
swore, and brought thee to the market, because I swore to thee that thou
shouldst be exposed in the market, and that the broker should cry thee
for sale.--If thou do this, perhaps the trick will deceive him and the
people, and they will believe that thou tookest her not to the market
but to expiate the oath.--This, replied Noor-ed-Deen, is the right
counsel. So the broker returned into the midst of the market, and,
taking hold of the hand of the slave-girl, made a sign to the Wezeer
El-Mo'een the son of Sawee, saying, O my lord, this is her owner who
hath just come. Then 'Alee Noor-ed-Deen advanced to the broker, and tore
the damsel from him, and struck her with his hand, saying to her, Wo to
thee! I have brought thee to the market for the sake of expiating my
oath. Go home, and disobey me not again. I want not thy price, that I
should sell thee; and if I sold the furniture of the house and
everything else of the kind over and over again, their produce would not
amount to thy price.--But when El-Mo'een the son of Sawee beheld
Noor-ed-Deen, he said to him, Wo to thee! Hast thou anything left to be
sold or bought?--And he would have laid violent hands upon him. The
merchants then looked towards Noor-ed-Deen (and they all loved him), and
he said to them, Here am I before you, and ye have all known his
tyranny.--By Allah, exclaimed the Wezeer, were it not for you, I had
killed him! Then all of them made signs, one to another, with the eye,
and said, Not one of us will interfere between thee and him. And upon
this, 'Alee Noor-ed-Deen went up to the Wezeer, the son of Sawee (and
Noor-ed-Deen was a man of courage), and he dragged the Wezeer from his
saddle, and threw him upon the ground. There was at that spot a
kneading-place for mud, and the Wezeer fell into the midst
of it, and Noor-ed-Deen beat him with his fist, and a blow fell upon his
teeth, by which his beard became dyed with his blood. Now there were
with the Wezeer ten memlooks, and when they saw Noor-ed-Deen treat their
master in this manner, they put their hands upon the hilts of their
swords, and would have fallen upon him and cut him in pieces; but the
people said to them, This is a Wezeer, and this is the son of a Wezeer,
and perhaps they may make peace with each other, and ye will incur the
anger of both of them; or perhaps a blow may fall upon your master, and
ye will all of you die the most ignominious of deaths: it is advisable,
therefore, that ye interfere not between them.--And when 'Alee
Noor-ed-Deen had ceased from beating the Wezeer, he took his slave-girl,
and returned to his house.



The Wezeer, the son of Sawee, then immediately arose, and his dress,
which before was white, was now dyed with three colours, the colour of
mud, and the colour of blood, and the colour of ashes; and
when he beheld himself in this condition, he took a round
mat, and hung it to his neck, and took in his hand two
bundles of coarse grass, and went and stood beneath the
palace of the Sulan, and cried out, O King of the age! I am
oppressed!--So they brought him before the King, who looked at him
attentively, and saw that he was his Wezeer, El-Mo'een the son of Sawee.
He said, therefore, Who hath done thus unto thee?--and the Wezeer cried
and moaned, and repeated these two verses:--

  Shall fortune oppress me while thou existest; and the dogs devour me
    when thou art a lion?
  Shall all else who are dry drink freely from thy tanks, and I thirst
    in thine asylum when thou art as rain?

--O my lord, he continued, thus is every one who loveth thee and serveth
thee: these afflictions always befall him.--And who, said the King
again, hath done thus unto thee?--Know, answered the Wezeer, that I went
forth to-day to the market of the female slaves with the idea of buying
a cook-maid, and saw in the market a slave-girl the like of whom I had
never in my life beheld, and the broker said that she belonged to 'Alee
Noor-ed-Deen. Now our lord the Sulan had given his father ten thousand
pieces of gold to buy for him with it a beautiful female slave, and he
bought that girl, and she pleased him; so he gave her to his son; and
when his father died, the son pursued the path of prodigality, until he
sold all his houses and gardens and utensils; and when he had become a
bankrupt, nothing else remaining in his possession, he took the
slave-girl to the market to sell her, and delivered her to the broker:
so he cried her for sale, and the merchants continued bidding for her
until her price amounted to four thousand pieces of gold; whereupon I
said to myself, I will buy this for our lord the Sulan; for her
original price was from him. I therefore said, O my son, receive her
price, four thousand pieces of gold. But when he heard my words, he
looked at me and replied, O ill-omened old man! I will sell her to the
Jews and the Christians rather than to thee.--I then said to him, I
would not buy her for myself, but for our lord the Sulan, who is our
benefactor. As soon, however, as he had heard these words from me, he
was filled with rage, and dragged me and threw me down from the horse,
notwithstanding my advanced age, and beat me, and ceased not to do so
until he left me in the state in which thou seest me. Nothing exposed me
to all this ill treatment but my coming to purchase this slave-girl for
your majesty.--The Wezeer then threw himself upon the ground, and lay
weeping and trembling.

Now when the Sulan beheld his condition, and had heard his speech, the
vein of anger swelled between his eyes, and he looked towards the
members of his court who were attending him; whereupon forty swordsmen
stood before him, and he said to them, Descend immediately to the house
of 'Alee the son of El-Fal the son of Khaan, and plunder it and
demolish it, and bring hither him and the slave-girl with their hands
bound behind them: drag them along upon their faces, and so bring them
before me. They replied, We hear and obey:--and went forth to repair to
the house of 'Alee Noor-ed-Deen. But there was in the court of the
Sulan a chamberlain named 'Alam-ed-Deen Senjer, who had been one of the
memlooks of El-Fal the son of Khaan, the father of 'Alee Noor-ed-Deen;
and when he heard the order of the Sulan, and saw the enemies prepared
to slay his master's son, it was insupportable to him; so he mounted his
horse, and proceeded to the house of 'Alee Noor-ed-Deen, and knocked at
the door. Noor-ed-Deen came forth to him, and, when he saw him, knew
him, and would have saluted him; but he said, O my master, this is not a
time for salutation, nor for talking. Noor-ed-Deen said, O
'Alam-ed-Deen, what is the news? He replied, Save thyself by flight,
thou and the slave-girl; for El-Mo'een the son of Sawee hath set up a
snare for you, and if ye fall into his hands he will slay you: the
Sulan hath sent to you forty swordsmen, and it is my advice that ye fly
before the evil fall upon you. Then Senjer stretched forth his hand to
Noor-ed-Deen with some pieces of gold, and he counted them, and found
them to be forty pieces; and he said, O my master, receive these, and if
I had with me more, I would give it thee: but this is not a time for
expostulating. And upon this, Noor-ed-Deen went in to the damsel, and
acquainted her with the occurrence, and she was confounded.

The two then went forth immediately from the city, and God let down the
veil of his protection upon them, and they proceeded to the bank of the
river, where they found a vessel ready to sail: the master was standing
in the midst of it, and saying, He who hath anything to do, whether
leave-taking or procuring provisions, or who hath forgotten aught, let
him do what he desireth and return; for we are going. And they all
replied, We have nothing remaining to do, O master. So, upon this, the
master said to his crew, Quick! Loose the rope's end, and pull up the
stake.--And 'Alee Noor-ed-Deen exclaimed, Whither, O master?
He answered, To the Abode of Peace, Baghdad. And Noor-ed-Deen embarked,
and the damsel with him, and they set the vessel afloat, and spread the
sails, and it shot along like a bird with its pair of wings, carrying
them forward with a favourable wind.

Meanwhile, the forty men whom the Sulan had sent came to the house of
'Alee Noor-ed-Deen, and broke open the doors and entered, and searched
all the chambers, but without success; so they demolished the house, and
returned, and acquainted the Sulan, who said, Search for them in every
place where they may be:--and they replied, We hear and obey. The Wezeer
El-Mo'een the son of Sawee then descended to his house, after the Sulan
had invested him with a robe of honour, and had said to him, None shall
take vengeance for thee but myself. And he greeted the King with a
prayer for long life, and his heart was set at ease: and the Sulan gave
orders to proclaim throughout the city, O all ye people! our lord the
Sulan hath commanded that whoever shall meet with 'Alee Noor-ed-Deen,
and bring him to the Sulan, shall be invested with a robe of honour,
and he will give him a thousand pieces of gold; and he who shall conceal
him, or know where he is, and not give information thereof, will merit
the exemplary punishment that shall befall him! So all the people began
to search for him; but could not trace him.--Such was the case with
these people.

Now as to 'Alee Noor-ed-Deen and his slave, they arrived in safety at
Baghdad, and the master of the vessel said to them, This is Baghdad, and
it is a city of security: winter with its cold hath departed from it,
and the spring-quarter hath come with its roses, and its trees are in
blossom, and its waters are flowing. And upon this, 'Alee Noor-ed-Deen
landed with his slave-girl, and gave the master five pieces of gold.
They then walked a little way, and destiny cast them among the gardens,
and they came to a place which they found swept and sprinkled, with long
maabahs, and pots suspended filled with water, and over it was a
covering of trellis-work of canes extending along the whole length of a
lane, at the upper end of which was the gate of a garden; but this was
shut. And Noor-ed-Deen said to the damsel, By Allah, this is a pleasant
place!--and she replied, O my master, let us sit down a while upon one
of these maabahs. So they mounted and seated themselves there, and
they washed their faces and hands, and enjoyed the current of the
zephyr, and slept.--Glory be to Him who sleepeth not!



This garden was called the Garden of Delight, and in it was a palace
called the Palace of Diversion, and it belonged to the Khaleefeh Haroon
Er-Rasheed, who, when his heart was contracted, used to come to this
garden, and enter the palace above mentioned, and there sit. The palace
had eighty latticed windows, and eighty lamps were suspended in it, and
in the midst of it was a great candlestick of gold; and when the
Khaleefeh entered it, he commanded the female slaves to open the
windows, and ordered Is-a the cup-companion to sing with them: so his
heart became dilated, and his anxiety ceased. There was a superintendent
to the garden, an old man, named the sheykh Ibraheem; and it happened
that he went forth once to transact some business, and found there
persons diverting themselves with women of suspicious character,
whereupon he was violently enraged, and having waited until the
Khaleefeh came thither some days after, he acquainted him with this
occurrence, and the Khaleefeh said, Whomsoever thou shalt find at the
gate of the garden, do with him what thou wilt. Now on this day the
sheykh Ibraheem went out to transact an affair of business, and found
the two sleeping at the garden-gate covered with a single izar; and he
said, Do not these two persons know that the Khaleefeh hath given me
permission to kill every one whom I find here? But I will only give
these two a slight beating, that no one may again approach the gate of
the garden. He then cut a green palm-stick, and went forth to them, and
raised his hand until the whiteness of his arm-pit appeared, and was
about to beat them; but he reflected in his mind, and said, O Ibraheem,
how shouldst thou beat them when thou knowest not their case? They may
be two strangers, or of the children of the road, whom
destiny hath cast here. I will therefore uncover their faces, and look
at them.--So he lifted up the izar from their faces, and said, These are
two handsome persons, and it is not proper that I should beat them. And
he covered their faces again, and, approaching the foot of 'Alee
Noor-ed-Deen, began to rub it gently; whereupon Noor-ed-Deen
opened his eyes, and saw that he was an old man; and he blushed, and
drew in his feet, and, sitting up, took the hand of the sheykh Ibraheem
and kissed it; and the sheykh said to him, O my son, whence are ye?--O
my master, he answered, we are strangers.--And a tear gushed from his
eye. The sheykh Ibraheem then said to him, O my son, know that the
Prophet (God bless and save him!) hath enjoined generosity to the
stranger. Wilt thou not arise, O my son, and enter the garden, and
divert thyself in it, that thy heart may be dilated?--O my master, said
Noor-ed-Deen, to whom doth this garden belong? The sheykh answered, O my
son, this garden I inherited from my family. And his design in saying
this was only that they might feel themselves at ease, and enter the
garden. And when Noor-ed-Deen heard his words, he thanked him, and
arose, together with his slave, and, the sheykh Ibraheem preceding them,
they entered the garden.

The gate was arched, and over it were vines with grapes of different
colours; the red, like rubies; and the black, like ebony. They entered a
bower, and found within it fruits growing in clusters and singly, and
the birds were warbling their various notes upon the branches: the
nightingale was pouring forth its melodious sounds; and the turtle-dove
filled the place with its cooing; and the blackbird, in its singing,
resembled a human being; and the ring-dove, a person exhilarated by
wine. The fruits upon the trees, comprising every description that was
good to eat, had ripened; and there were two of each kind: there were
the camphor-apricot, and the almond-apricot, and the apricot of
Khurasan; the plum of a colour like the complexion of beauties; the
cherry delighting the sense of every man; the red, the white, and the
green fig, of the most beautiful colours; and flowers like pearls and
coral; the rose, whose redness put to shame the cheeks of the lovely;
the violet, like sulphur in contact with fire; the myrtle, the
gilliflower, the lavender, and the anemone; and their leaves were
bespangled with the tears of the clouds; the chamomile smiled,
displaying its teeth, and the narcissus looked at the rose with its
negroes' eyes; the citrons resembled round cups; the limes were like
bullets of gold; the ground was carpeted with flowers of every colour,
and the place beamed with the charms of spring; the river murmured by
while the birds sang, and the wind whistled among the trees; the season
was temperate, and the zephyr was languishing.



The sheykh Ibraheem conducted them into the elevated saloon,
and they were charmed with its beauty and the extraordinary elegances
which it displayed, and seated themselves in one of the windows; and
Noor-ed-Deen, reflecting upon his past entertainments, exclaimed, By
Allah, this place is most delightful! It hath reminded me of past
events, and quenched in me an anguish like the fire of the
ghaa.--The sheykh Ibraheem then brought to them some food,
and they ate to satisfaction, and washed their hands, and Noor-ed-Deen,
seating himself again in one of the windows, called to his slave, and
she came to him; and they sat gazing at the trees laden with all kinds
of fruits; after which, Noor-ed-Deen looked towards the sheykh, and said
to him, O sheykh Ibraheem, hast thou not any beverage? For people drink
after eating.--So the sheykh brought him some sweet and cold water: but
Noor-ed-Deen said, This is not the beverage I desire.--Dost thou want
wine? asked the sheykh.--Yes, answered Noor-ed-Deen. The sheykh
exclaimed, I seek refuge with Allah from it! Verily, for thirteen years
I have done nothing of that kind; for the Prophet (God bless and save
him!) cursed its drinker and its presser and its carrier.--Hear from me
two words, said Noor-ed-Deen. The sheykh replied, Say what thou wilt. So
he said, If thou be neither the presser of the wine, nor its drinker,
nor its carrier, will aught of the curse fall upon thee? The sheykh
answered, No.--Then take this piece of gold, rejoined Noor-ed-Deen, and
these two pieces of silver, and mount the ass, and halt at a distance
from the place, and whatsoever man thou findest to buy it, call to him,
and say to him, take these two pieces of silver, and with this piece of
gold buy some wine, and place it upon the ass:--so, in this case, thou
wilt be neither the carrier, nor the presser, nor the buyer; and nothing
will befall thee of that which befalleth the rest.

The sheykh Ibraheem, after laughing at his words, replied, By Allah, I
have never seen one more witty than thou, nor heard speech more sweet.
And Noor-ed-Deen said to him, We have become dependant upon thee, and
thou hast nothing to do but to comply with our wishes: bring us,
therefore, all that we require.--O my son, said the sheykh, my buttery
here is before thee (and it was the store-room furnished for the Prince
of the Faithful): enter it then, and take from it what thou wilt; for it
containeth more than thou desirest. So Noor-ed-Deen entered the
store-room, and beheld in it vessels of gold and silver and crystal,
adorned with a variety of jewels; and he took out such of them as he
desired, and poured the wine into the vessels of earthenware and bottles
of glass; and he and the damsel began to drink, astonished at the beauty
of the things which they beheld. The sheykh Ibraheem then brought to
them sweet-scented flowers, and seated himself at a distance from them;
and they continued drinking, in a state of the utmost delight, until the
wine took effect upon them, and their cheeks reddened, and their eyes
wantoned like those of the gazelle, and their hair hung
down: whereupon the sheykh Ibraheem said, What aileth me
that I am sitting at a distance from them? Why should I not sit by
them? And when shall I be in the company of such as these two, who are
like two moons?--He then advanced, and seated himself at the edge of the
raised portion of the floor; and Noor-ed-Deen said to him, O my master,
by my life I conjure thee to approach and join us. So he went to them;
and Noor-ed-Deen filled a cup, and, looking at the sheykh, said to him,
Drink, that thou mayest know how delicious is its flavour. But the
sheykh Ibraheem exclaimed, I seek refuge with Allah! Verily, for
thirteen years I have done nothing of that kind.--And Noor-ed-Deen,
feigning to pay no attention to him, drank the cup, and threw himself
upon the ground, pretending that intoxication had overcome him.



Upon this, Enees-el-Jelees looked towards the sheykh, and said to him, O
sheykh Ibraheem, see how this man hath treated me.--O my mistress, said
he, what aileth him? She rejoined, Always doth he treat me thus: he
drinketh a while, and then sleepeth, and I remain alone, and find no one
to keep me company over my cup. If I drink, who will serve me? And if I
sing, who will hear me?--The sheykh, moved with tenderness and affection
for her by her words, replied, It is not proper that a cup-companion be
thus. The damsel then filled a cup, and, looking at the sheykh Ibraheem,
said to him, I conjure thee, by my life that thou take it and drink it;
reject it not, but accept it, and refresh my heart. So he stretched
forth his hand, and took the cup, and drank it; and she filled for
him a second time, and handed it to him, saying, O my master, this
remaineth for thee. He replied, By Allah, I cannot drink it: that
which I have drunk is enough for me. But she said, By Allah, it is
indispensable:--and he took the cup, and drank it. She then gave him the
third; and he took it, and was about to drink it, when, lo, Noor-ed-Deen
raised himself, and said to him, O sheykh Ibraheem, what is this? Did I
not conjure thee a while ago, and thou refusedst, and saidst, Verily,
for thirteen years I have not done it?--The sheykh Ibraheem, touched
with shame, replied, By Allah, I am not in fault; for she pressed me.
And Noor-ed-Deen laughed, and they resumed their carousal, and the
damsel, turning her eyes towards her master, said to him, O my master,
drink thou, and do not urge the sheykh Ibraheem; that I may divert thee
with the sight of him. So she began to fill and to hand to her master,
and her master filled and gave to her, and thus they continued to do,
time after time; till at length the sheykh Ibraheem looked towards them
and said, What meaneth this? And what sort of carousal is this?
Wherefore do ye not give me to drink, since I have become your
cup-companion?--At this they both laughed until they became almost
senseless; and then drank, and gave him to drink; and they continued
thus until the expiration of a third of the night, when the damsel said,
O sheykh Ibraheem, with thy permission shall I rise and light one of the
candles which are arranged here?--Rise, he answered; but light not more
than one candle. But she sprang upon her feet, and, beginning with the
first candle, proceeded until she had lighted eighty. She then sat down
again; and presently Noor-ed-Deen said, O sheykh Ibraheem, in what
favour am I held with thee? Wilt thou not allow me to light one of these
lamps?--The sheykh answered, Arise, and light one lamp, and be not thou
also troublesome. So he arose, and, beginning with the first lamp,
lighted all the eighty; and the saloon seemed to dance. And after this,
the sheykh Ibraheem, overcome by intoxication, said to them, Ye are more
frolicksome than I:--and he sprang upon his feet, and opened all the
windows, and sat down again with them, and they continued carousing and
reciting verses; and the place rang with their merriment.

Now God, the All-seeing and All-knowing, who hath appointed a cause to
every event, had decreed that the Khaleefeh should be sitting that night
at one of the windows looking towards the Tigris, by moonlight; and he
looked in that direction, and saw the light of lamps and candles
reflected in the river, and, turning his eyes up towards the palace in
the garden, he beheld it beaming with those candles and lamps, and
exclaimed, Bring hither to me Jaafar El-Barmekee! In the twinkling of an
eye, Jaafar stood before the Prince of the Faithful; and the Khaleefeh
said to him, O dog of Wezeers, dost thou serve me and not acquaint me
with what happeneth in the city of Baghdad?--What, asked Jaafar, is the
occasion of these words? The Khaleefeh answered, If the city of Baghdad
were not taken from me, the Palace of Diversion were not enlivened with
the light of the lamps and candles, and its windows were not opened. Wo
to thee! Who could do these things unless the office of Khaleefeh were
taken from me?--Who, said Jaafar (the muscles of his side quivering
from fear), informed thee that the lamps and candles were lighted in the
Palace of Diversion, and that its windows were opened? The Khaleefeh
replied, Advance hither to me, and look. So Jaafar approached the
Khaleefeh, and, looking towards the garden, beheld the palace as it were
a flame of fire, its light surpassing that of the moon. He desired,
therefore, to make an excuse for the sheykh Ibraheem, the
superintendent, thinking, from what he beheld, that the event might have
occurred through his permission: and accordingly he said, O Prince of
the Faithful, the sheykh Ibraheem last week said to me, O my master
Jaafar, I am desirous of entertaining my children during my life and the
life of the Prince of the Faithful.--And what, said I, is thy design in
saying this? He answered, It is my wish that thou wouldst obtain for me
permission from the Khaleefeh that I may celebrate the circumcision of
my sons in the palace. So I said, Do what thou wilt with respect to the
entertainment of thy sons, and, if God will, I shall have an interview
with the Khaleefeh, and will acquaint him with it. And he left me thus;
and I forgot to acquaint thee.--O Jaafar, said the Khaleefeh, thou wast
guilty of one offence against me, and then thine offence became two: for
thou hast erred in two points: the first, thy not acquainting me with
this affair; and the second, thy not accomplishing the desire of the
sheykh Ibraheem; for he did not come to thee and address thee with these
words but to hint a request for some money by the aid of which to effect
his design, and thou neither gavest him anything nor acquaintedst me
that I might give him.--O Prince of the Faithful, replied Jaafar, I
forgot.



The Khaleefeh then said, By my forefathers, I will not pass the
remainder of my night but with him, for he is a just man, who
frequenteth the sheykhs, and attendeth to the poor, and
favoureth the indigent; and I imagine all his acquaintances are with him
this night; so I must repair to him: perhaps one of them may offer up
for us a prayer productive of good to us in this world and the next; and
probably some advantage may accrue to him from my presence, and he will
receive pleasure from this, together with his friends.--O Prince of the
Faithful, replied Jaafar, the greater part of the night hath passed, and
they are now about to disperse. But the Khaleefeh said, We must go to
them. And Jaafar was silent, and was perplexed in his mind, not knowing
what to do. So the Khaleefeh rose upon his feet, and Jaafar rose and
preceded him, and Mesroor the eunuch went with them. The three walked on
reflecting, and, departing from the palace, proceeded through the
streets, in the attire of merchants; until they arrived at the gate of
the garden above mentioned; and the Khaleefeh, approaching it, found it
open; and he was surprised, and said, See, O Jaafar, how the sheykh
Ibraheem hath left the gate open until this hour, which is not his usual
custom. They then entered, and came to the end of the garden, where they
stopped beneath the palace; and the Khaleefeh said, O Jaafar, I desire
to take a view of them secretly before I go up to them, that I may see
how the sheykhs are occupied in the dispensing of their blessings and
the employment of their miraculous powers; for they have qualities which
distinguish them both in their private retirements and in their public
exercises; and now we hear not their voices, nor discover any indication
of their presence. Having thus said, he looked around, and, seeing a
tall walnut tree, he said, O Jaafar, I would climb this tree (for its
branches are near to the windows) and look at them. And accordingly he
ascended the tree, and climbed from branch to branch until he came to
that which was opposite to one of the windows, and there he sat, and,
looking in through this window of the palace, beheld a damsel and a
young man, like two moons (extolled be the perfection of Him who created
them!); and he saw the sheykh Ibraheem sitting with a cup in his hand,
and saying, O mistress of beauties, drinking unaccompanied by merry
sounds is not pleasant. Hast thou not heard the saying of the poet?--

  Circulate it in the large cup, and in the small; and receive it
    from the hand of the shining moon:
  And drink not without merry sounds; for I have observed that
    horses drink to the sound of whistling.

When the Khaleefeh witnessed this conduct of the sheykh Ibraheem, the
vein of anger swelled between his eyes, and he descended, and said, O
Jaafar, I have never seen anything of the miraculous performances of the
just such as I have beheld this night: ascend, therefore, thyself also,
into this tree, and look, lest the blessings of the just escape
thee.--On hearing the words of the Prince of the Faithful,
Jaafar was perplexed at his situation; and he climbed up into the tree,
and looked, and saw Noor-ed-Deen and the sheykh Ibraheem and the damsel,
and the sheykh Ibraheem had the cup in his hand. As soon as he beheld
this, he made sure of destruction; and he descended, and stood before
the Prince of the Faithful, and the Khaleefeh said, O Jaafar, praise be
to God who hath made us to be of the number of those who follow the
external ordinances of the holy law, and averted from us the sin of
disguising ourselves by the practice of hypocrisy! But Jaafar was unable
to reply, from his excessive confusion. The Khaleefeh then looked
towards him, and said, Who can have brought these persons hither, and
admitted them into my palace? But the like of this young man and this
damsel, in beauty and loveliness and symmetry of form, mine eye hath
never beheld.--Jaafar, now conceiving a hope that the Khaleefeh might be
propitiated, replied, Thou hast spoken truly, O Prince of the Faithful.
And the Khaleefeh said, O Jaafar, climb up with us upon this branch
which is opposite them, that we may amuse ourselves by observing them.
So they both climbed up into the tree, and, looking at them, heard the
sheykh Ibraheem say, O my mistress, I have relinquished decorum by the
drinking of wine; but the pleasure of this is not complete without the
melodious sounds of stringed instruments.--O sheykh Ibraheem, replied
Enees-el-Jelees, by Allah, if we had any musical instrument, our
happiness were perfect. And when the sheykh Ibraheem heard her words, he
rose upon his feet.--The Khaleefeh said to Jaafar, What may he be going
to do? Jaafar replied, I know not.--And the sheykh Ibraheem went away,
and returned with a lute; and the Khaleefeh, looking attentively at it,
saw that it was the lute of Is-a, the cup-companion; and said, By
Allah, if this damsel sing not well, I will crucify you all; but if she
sing well, I will pardon them, and crucify thee. So Jaafar said, O
Allah, let her not sing well!--Why? asked the Khaleefeh.--That thou
mayest crucify all of us, answered Jaafar; and then we shall cheer one
another by conversation. And the Khaleefeh laughed: and the damsel took
the lute, and tuned its strings, and played upon it in a manner that
would melt iron, and inspire an idiot with intellect; after which she
sang with such sweetness that the Khaleefeh exclaimed, O Jaafar, never
in my life have I heard so enchanting a voice as this!--Perhaps, said
Jaafar, the anger of the Khaleefeh hath departed from him?--Yea, he
answered; it hath departed. He then descended with Jaafar from the tree,
and, looking towards him, said, I am desirous of going up to them, to
sit with them, and to hear the damsel sing before me.--O Prince of the
Faithful, replied Jaafar, if thou go up to them, probably they will be
troubled by thy presence; and as to the sheykh Ibraheem, he will
assuredly die of fear. The Khaleefeh therefore said, O Jaafar, thou must
acquaint me with some stratagem by means of which I may learn the truth
of the affair without their knowing that I have discovered them. And he
and Jaafar walked towards the Tigris, reflecting upon this matter; and
lo, a fisherman stood beneath the windows of the palace, and he threw
his net, hoping to catch something by means of which to obtain his
subsistence.--Now the Khaleefeh had, on a former occasion, called to the
sheykh Ibraheem, and said to him, What was that noise that I heard
beneath the windows of the palace?--and he answered, The voices of the
fishermen, who are fishing:--so he said, Go down and forbid them from
coming to this place. They were therefore forbidden to come thither; but
this night there came a fisherman named Kereem, and, seeing the
garden-gate open, he said within himself, This is a time of
inadvertence, and perhaps I may catch some fish on this occasion:--so he
took his net, and threw it into the river, and then recited some verses,
contrasting the condition of the poor fisherman, toiling throughout the
night, with that of the lord of the palace, who, awaking from a pleasant
slumber, findeth the fawn in his possession; and as soon as he had
finished his recitation, lo, the Khaleefeh, unattended, stood at his
head. The Khaleefeh knew him, and exclaimed, O Kereem!--and the
fisherman, hearing him call him by his name, turned towards him; and
when he beheld the Khaleefeh, the muscles of his side quivered, and he
said, By Allah, O Prince of the Faithful, I did not this in mockery of
the mandate; but poverty and the wants of my family impelled me to the
act of which thou art witness. The Khaleefeh replied, Throw thy net for
my luck. And the fisherman advanced, rejoicing exceedingly, and cast the
net, and, having waited until it had attained its limit and become
steady at the bottom, drew it in again, and there came up in it a
variety of fish that could not be numbered.



The Khaleefeh was delighted at this, and said, O Kereem, strip off thy
clothes:--and he did so. He was clad in a jubbeh in which
were a hundred patches of coarse woollen stuff, containing vermin of the
most abominable kind, and among them fleas in such numbers that he might
almost have been transported by their means over the face of the earth;
and he took from his head a turban which for three years he had never
unwound; but when he happened to find a piece of rag he twisted it
around it: and when he had taken off the jubbeh and turban, the
Khaleefeh pulled off from his own person two vests of silk of Alexandria
and Baalabekk, and a melwaah
and said to the fisherman, Take these, and put them on. The Khaleefeh
then put on himself the fisherman's jubbeh and turban, and, having drawn
a litham over his face, said to the fisherman, Go about thy
business;--and he kissed the feet of the Khaleefeh, and thanked him,
reciting these two verses:--

  Thou hast granted me favours beyond my power to acknowledge,
    and completely satisfied all my wants.
  I will thank thee, therefore, as long as I live; and when I die,
    my bones will thank thee in their grave.

But scarcely had he finished his verses, when the vermin overran the
person of the Khaleefeh, and he began to seize them with his right hand
and his left from his neck, and to throw them down; and he exclaimed, O
fisherman, wo to thee! What are these abundant vermin in this jubbeh?--O
my lord, he answered, at present they torment thee; but when a week
shall have passed over thee, thou wilt not feel them, nor think of them.
The Khaleefeh laughed, and said to him, How can I suffer this jubbeh to
remain upon me? The fisherman replied, I wish to tell thee something;
but I am ashamed, through my awe of the Khaleefeh. Impart, said the
Khaleefeh, what thou hast to tell me. So he said to him, It hath
occurred to my mind, O Prince of the Faithful, that thou desirest to
learn the art of fishing, in order that thou mayest be master of a trade
that may profit thee; and if such be thy desire, this jubbeh is suitable
to thee. And the Khaleefeh laughed at his words.

The fisherman then went his way, and the Khaleefeh took the basket of
fish, and, having put upon it a little grass, went with it to Jaafar,
and stood before him; and Jaafar, thinking that he was Kereem the
fisherman, feared for him, and said, O Kereem, what brought thee hither?
Save thyself by flight; for the Khaleefeh is here this night.--And when
the Khaleefeh heard the words of Jaafar, he laughed until he fell down
upon his back. So Jaafar said, Perhaps thou art our lord the Prince of
the Faithful?--Yes, O Jaafar, answered the Khaleefeh, and thou art my
Wezeer, and I came with thee hither, and thou knowest me not. How then
should the sheykh Ibraheem know me when he is drunk? Remain where thou
art until I return to thee.--Jaafar replied, I hear and obey:--and the
Khaleefeh advanced to the door of the palace, and knocked. The sheykh
Ibraheem arose, therefore, and said, Who is at the door? He answered, I,
O sheykh Ibraheem. The sheykh said, Who art thou?--and the Khaleefeh
answered, I am Kereem the fisherman: I heard that there were guests with
thee, and have therefore brought thee some fish; for it is
excellent.--Now Noor-ed-Deen and the damsel were both fond of fish, and
when they heard the mention of it they rejoiced exceedingly, and said, O
my master, open to him, and let him come in to us with the fish which he
hath brought. So the sheykh Ibraheem opened the door, and the Khaleefeh,
in his fisherman's disguise, entered, and began by salutation; and the
sheykh Ibraheem said to him, Welcome to the robber, the thief, the
gambler! Come hither, and shew us the fish which thou hast brought.--He
therefore shewed it to them; and lo, it was alive, and moving; and the
damsel exclaimed, By Allah, O my master, this fish is excellent! I wish
it were fried!--By Allah, said the sheykh Ibraheem, thou hast spoken
truth. Then, addressing the Khaleefeh, he said, O fisherman, I wish thou
hadst brought this fish fried. Arise, and fry it for us, and bring
it.--On the head be thy commands, replied the Khaleefeh: I will fry it,
and bring it.--Be quick, said they, in doing it.

The Khaleefeh therefore arose and ran back to Jaafar, and said, O
Jaafar, they want the fish fried.--O Prince of the Faithful, replied he,
give it me, and I will fry it. But the Khaleefeh said, By the tombs of
my ancestors, none shall fry it but myself; with my own hand will I do
it! He then repaired to the hut of the superintendent, and, searching
there, found in it everything that he required, the frying-pan, and even
the salt, and wild marjoram, and other things. So he approached the
fire-place, and put on the frying-pan, and fried it nicely; and when it
was done, he put it upon a banana-leaf, and having taken from the garden
some limes, he went up with the fish, and placed it before them. The
young man, therefore, and the damsel and the sheykh Ibraheem advanced
and ate; and when they had finished, they washed their hands, and
Noor-ed-Deen said, By Allah, O fisherman, thou hast done us a kindness
this night. Then putting his hand into his pocket, he took forth for him
three pieces of gold, of those which Senjer had presented to him when he
was setting forth on his journey, and said, O fisherman, excuse me; for,
by Allah, if I had known thee before the events that have lately
happened to me, I would have extracted the bitterness of poverty from
thy heart: but take this as accordant with my present circumstances. So
saying, he threw the pieces of gold to the Khaleefeh, who took them, and
kissed them, and put them in his pocket. The object of the
Khaleefeh in doing this was only that he might hear the damsel sing: so
he said to him, Thou hast treated me with beneficence, and abundantly
recompensed me; but I beg of thy unbounded indulgence that this damsel
may sing an air, that I may hear her. Noor-ed-Deen therefore said, O
Enees-el-Jelees! She replied, Yes.--By my life, said he, sing to us
something for the gratification of this fisherman; for he desireth to
hear thee. And when she had heard what her master said, she took the
lute, and tried it with her fingers, after she had twisted its pegs, and
sang to it these two verses:--

  The fingers of many a fawn-like damsel have played upon the lute,
    and the soul hath been ravished by the touch.
  She hath made the deaf to hear her songs; and the dumb hath exclaimed,
    Thou hast excelled in thy singing!



Then she played again, in an extraordinary manner, so as to charm the
minds of her hearers, and sang the following couplet:--

  We are honoured by your visiting our abode, and your splendour
    hath dispelled the darkness of the moonless night:
  It is therefore incumbent upon me to perfume my dwelling with musk
    and rose-water and camphor.

Upon this, the Khaleefeh was affected with violent emotion, and overcome
by ecstasy, so that he was no longer master of himself from excessive
delight; and he began to exclaim, Allah approve thee! Allah approve
thee! Allah approve thee! So Noor-ed-Deen said to him, O fisherman, have
the damsel and her art in striking the chords pleased thee?--Yea, by
Allah! exclaimed the Khaleefeh. And Noor-ed-Deen immediately said, She
is bestowed upon thee as a present from me, the present of a generous
man who will not revoke his gift. And he rose upon his feet, and took a
melwaah, and threw it upon the Khaleefeh in the fisherman's disguise,
ordering him to depart with the damsel. But she looked towards him, and
said, O my master, wilt thou part from me without bidding me farewell?
If we must be separated, pause while I take leave of thee.--And she
recited the following couplet:--

  If you depart from me, still your abode will be in my heart,
    in the recess of my bosom.
  I implore the Compassionate to grant our reunion; and a boon
    such as this, God will grant to whom He pleaseth.

And when she had finished, Noor-ed-Deen thus replied to her:--

  She bade me farewell on the day of separation, saying, while
    she wept from the pain that it occasioned,
  What wilt thou do after my departure?--Say this, I replied,
    unto him who will survive it.

The Khaleefeh, when he heard this, was distressed at the thought of
separating them, and, looking towards the young man, he said to him, O
my master, art thou in fear on account of any crime, or art thou in debt
to any one? Noor-ed-Deen answered, By Allah, O fisherman, a wonderful
event, and an extraordinary adventure, happened to me and this damsel:
if it were engraved on the understanding, it would be a lesson to him
who would be admonished.--Wilt thou not, rejoined the Khaleefeh, relate
to us thy story, and acquaint us with thy case? Perhaps thy doing so may
be productive of relief; for the relief of God is near.--So Noor-ed-Deen
said, Wilt thou hear our story in poetry or in prose?--Prose, answered
the Khaleefeh, is mere talk; and verse, words put together like pearls.
And Noor-ed-Deen hung down his head towards the ground, and then related
his story in a series of verses: but when he had finished, the Khaleefeh
begged him to explain his case more fully. He therefore acquainted him
with the whole of his circumstances from beginning to end; and when the
Khaleefeh understood the affair, he said to him, Whither wouldst thou
now repair? He answered, God's earth is wide. The Khaleefeh then said to
him, I will write for thee a letter which thou shalt convey to the
Sulan Moammad the son of Suleyman Ez-Zeynee, and when he shall have
read it, he will do thee no injury.--Is there in the world, said
Noor-ed-Deen, a fisherman who correspondeth with Kings? Verily this is a
thing that can never be.--Thou hast spoken truly, rejoined the
Khaleefeh; but I will acquaint thee with the cause. Know that I read in
the same school with him, under a master, and I was his monitor; and
after that, prosperity was his lot, and he became a Sulan, while God
made me to be a fisherman: yet I have never sent to request anything of
him, but he hath performed my wish; and if I sent to him every day to
request a thousand things of him, he would do what I asked. When
Noor-ed-Deen, therefore, heard his words, he said to him, Write, that I
may see. And he took an inkhorn and a pen, and wrote (after the phrase,
In the name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful).--To proceed.--This
letter is from Haroon Er-Rasheed the son of El-Mahdee, to his highness
Moammad the son of Suleyman Ez-Zeynee, who hath been encompassed by my
beneficence, and whom I constituted my viceroy of a portion of my
dominions. I acquaint thee that the bearer of this letter is
Noor-ed-Deen the son of El-Fal the son of Khaan the Wezeer, and on his
arrival in thy presence thou shalt divest thyself of the regal
authority, and seat him in thy place; for I have appointed him to the
office to which I formerly appointed thee: so disobey not my commands:
and peace be on thee.--He then gave the letter to 'Alee Noor-ed-Deen,
who took it and kissed it and put it in his turban, and immediately set
forth on his journey.

The sheykh Ibraheem now looked towards the Khaleefeh in his fisherman's
disguise, and said to him, O most contemptible of fishermen, thou hast
brought us two fish worth twenty half-dirhems, and received
three pieces of gold, and desirest to take the slave also. But when the
Khaleefeh heard these words, he cried out at him, and made a sign to
Mesroor, who immediately discovered himself, and rushed in upon him.
Jaafar, meanwhile, had sent one of the attendants of the garden to the
porter of the palace to demand a suit of clothing of him for the Prince
of the Faithful; and the man went, and brought the dress, and kissed the
ground before the Khaleefeh, who took off and gave to him that with
which he was then clad, and put on this suit. The sheykh Ibraheem was
sitting on a chair: the Khaleefeh paused to see the result: and the
sheykh was astounded, and began to bite the ends of his fingers through
his confusion, saying, Am I asleep or awake? The Khaleefeh then looked
at him, and said, O sheykh Ibraheem, what is this predicament in which
thou art placed? And upon this, the sheykh recovered from his
intoxication, and, throwing himself upon the ground, implored
forgiveness: and the Khaleefeh pardoned him; after which he gave orders
that the damsel should be conveyed to the palace where he resided; and
when she had arrived there, he appropriated to her a separate lodging,
and appointed persons to wait upon her, and said to her, Know that I
have sent thy master as Sulan of El-Barah, and, if God please, I will
despatch to him a dress of honour, and send thee also to him with it.

As to Noor-ed-Deen, he continued his journey until he entered
El-Barah, and went up to the palace of the Sulan, when he uttered a
loud cry, whereupon the Sulan desired him to approach; and when he came
into the presence of the King, he kissed the ground before him, and
produced the letter, and handed it to him. And as soon as the Sulan saw
the superscription in the handwriting of the Prince of the Faithful, he
rose upon his feet, and, having kissed it three times, said, I hear and
pay obedience to God (whose name be exalted!) and to the Prince of the
Faithful. He then summoned before him the four aees, and
the Emeers, and was about to divest himself of the regal office: but,
lo, the Wezeer El-Mo'een the son of Sawee was before him, and the Sulan
gave him the letter of the Prince of the Faithful, and when he saw it,
he rent it in pieces, and put it into his mouth, and chewed it, and
threw it down. The Sulan, enraged, cried, Wo to thee! What hath induced
thee to act thus?--He answered, This man hath had no interview with the
Khaleefeh nor with his Wezeer; but is a young wretch, an artful devil,
who, having met with a paper containing the handwriting of the
Khaleefeh, hath counterfeited it, and written what he desired: wherefore
then shouldst thou abdicate the sovereignty, when the Khaleefeh hath not
sent to thee an envoy with a royal autographical mandate; for if this
affair were true, he had sent with him a Chamberlain or a Wezeer; but he
came alone.--What then is to be done? said the Sulan. The Wezeer
answered, Send away this young man with me, and I will take charge of
him, and despatch him in company with a Chamberlain to the city of
Baghdad; and if his words be true, he will bring us a royal
autographical mandate and diploma of investiture; and if not true, they
will send him back to us with the Chamberlain, and I will take my
revenge upon my offender.

When the Sulan heard what the Wezeer said, it pleased him; and the
Wezeer took him away, and cried out to the pages, who threw
down Noor-ed-Deen, and beat him until he became insensible. He then
ordered to put a chain upon his feet, and called to the jailer; and when
he came, he kissed the ground before him. This jailer was named
uey; and the Wezeer said to him, O uey, I desire that
thou take this person, and cast him into one of the subterranean cells
which are in thy prison, and torture him night and day. The jailer
replied, I hear and obey:--and he put Noor-ed-Deen into the prison, and
locked the door upon him; but after having done this, he gave orders to
sweep a maabah within the door, and furnished it with a prayer-carpet
and a pillow, and seated Noor-ed-Deen upon it, and loosed his chain,
and treated him with kindness. The Wezeer every day sent to him,
commanding him to beat him; and the jailer pretended that he tortured
him, while, on the contrary, he treated him with benignity.

Thus he continued to do for forty days; and on the forty-first day,
there came a present from the Khaleefeh, and when the Sulan saw it, it
pleased him, and he conferred with the Wezeers upon the subject; but one
said, Perhaps this present was designed for the new Sulan. Upon this,
the Wezeer El-Mo'een the son of Sawee remarked, It were proper to have
slain him on his arrival:--and the Sulan exclaimed, Now thou hast
reminded me of him, go down and bring him, and I will strike off his
head. The Wezeer replied, I hear and obey:--and arose, saying, I desire
to proclaim throughout the city, He who wisheth to witness the
decapitation of Noor-ed-Deen 'Alee the son of El-Fal the son of Khaan,
let him come to the palace:--so that all the people may come to behold
it, and I may gratify my heart, and mortify my enviers. The Sulan said,
Do what thou wilt. So the Wezeer descended, full of joy and happiness,
and went to the Walee, and ordered him to make this proclamation; and
when the people heard the crier, they all grieved and wept, even the
boys in the schools, and the tradesmen in their shops; and numbers of
the people strove together to take for themselves places where they
might behold the spectacle, while others repaired to the prison, to
accompany him thence. The Wezeer then went forth, attended by ten
memlooks, to the prison: and uey the jailer said to him, What dost
thou desire, O our lord the Wezeer?--Bring forth to me, said the Wezeer,
this young wretch. The jailer replied, He is in a most miserable state
from the excessive beating that I have inflicted upon him. And he
entered, and found him reciting some verses, commencing thus:--

  Who is there to aid me in my affliction? For my pain hath become
    intense, and my remedy is scarce procurable!

And the jailer pulled off from him his clean clothes, and, having clad
him in two dirty garments, brought him out to the Wezeer. Noor-ed-Deen
then looked at him, and saw that he was his enemy who had incessantly
desired his destruction; and when he beheld him, he wept, and said to
him, Art thou secure from misfortune? Hast thou not heard the saying of
the poet?--

  They made use of their power, and used it tyrannically; and soon
    it became as though it never had existed.

O Wezeer, know that God (whose perfection be extolled, and whose name
be exalted!) is the doer of whatsover He willeth.--O 'Alee, replied the
Wezeer, wouldst thou frighten me by these words? I am now going to
strike off thy head, in spite of the people of El-Barah; and I will pay
no regard to thy counsel; but I will rather attend to the saying of the
poet:--

  Let fortune do whatever it willeth, and bear with cheerful mind
    the effects of fate.

How excellent also is the saying of another poet:--

  He who liveth after his enemy a single day, hath attained
    his desire.

The Wezeer then ordered his pages to convey him on the back of a mule;
whereupon they said to him (being distressed to obey), Suffer us to
stone him and cut him in pieces, though our lives should be sacrificed
in consequence. But he replied, Never do it. Have ye not heard what the
poet hath said:--

  A decreed term is my inevitable lot; and as soon as its days
    have expired, I die.
  If the lions dragged me into their forest, they could not close it
    while aught of it remained.

So they proceeded to proclaim before Noor-ed-Deen, This is the smallest
recompense of him who forgeth a letter from the Khaleefeh to the Sulan.
And they continued to parade him throughout El-Barah until they
stationed him beneath the window of the palace, and in the place of
blood, when the executioner approached him, and said to him,
I am a slave under command; and if thou hast any want, acquaint me with
it, that I may perform it for thee; for there remaineth not of thy life
any more than the period until the Sulan shall put forth his face from
the window. And upon this, Noor-ed-Deen looked to the right and left,
and recited these verses:--

  Is there among you a merciful friend, who will aid me? I conjure
    you by Allah to answer me!
  My life hath passed, and my death is at hand! Is there any who
    will pity me, to obtain my recompense,
  And consider my state, and relieve my anguish, by a draught
    of water that my torment may be lightened?

And the people were excited to tears for him; and the executioner took
some water to hand it to him; but the Wezeer arose from his place, and
struck the ulleh of water with his hand, and broke it, and
called to the executioner, commanding him to strike off his head;
whereupon he bound Noor-ed-Deen's eyes. The people, however, called out
against the Wezeer, and raised a tumultuous cry against him, and many
words passed between them; and while they were in this state, lo, a
dust rose, and filled the sky and the open tracts; and when the Sulan
beheld it, as he sat in the palace, he said to his attendants, See what
is the news. The Wezeer said, After thou shalt first have beheaded this
man. But the Sulan replied, Wait thou until we see what is the news.



Now this dust was the dust of Jaafar, the Wezeer of the Khaleefeh, and
of his attendants; and the cause of their coming was this:--The
Khaleefeh had passed thirty days without remembering the affair of 'Alee
the son of El-Fal the son of Khaan, and no one mentioned it to him,
until he came one night to the private apartment of Enees-el-Jelees, and
heard her lamenting, as she recited, with a soft voice, the saying of
the poet:--

  Thine image  whether distant or near, and my tongue
    never ceaseth to mention thee.

Her lamentation increased, and lo, the Khaleefeh opened the door, and
entered the chamber, and saw Enees-el-Jelees weeping. On beholding the
Khaleefeh, she fell at his feet, and, having kissed them three times,
recited these two verses:--

  O thou of pure origin, and of excellent birth; of ripe-fruitful branch,
    and of unsullied race!
  I remind thee of the promise thy beneficence granted, and far be it
    from thee that thou shouldst forget it.

The Khaleefeh said to her, Who art thou? She answered, I am the present
given to thee by 'Alee the son of El-Fal the son of Khaan; and I
request the fulfilment of the promise which thou gavest me, that thou
wouldst send me to him with the honorary gift; for I have now been here
thirty days, and have not tasted sleep. And upon this, the Khaleefeh
summoned Jaafar El-Barmekee, and said to him, For thirty days I have
heard no news of 'Alee the son of El-Fal the son of Khaan, and I
imagine nothing less than that the Sulan hath killed him: but, by my
head! by the tombs of my ancestors! if any evil event hath happened to
him, I will destroy him who hath been the cause of it, though he be the
dearest of men in my estimation! I desire, therefore, that thou journey
immediately to El-Barah, and bring me an account of the conduct of the
King Moammad the son of Suleyman Ez-Zeynee to 'Alee the son of El-Fal
the son of Khaan.

So Jaafar obeyed his commands, and set forth on his journey, and when he
approached, and saw this tumult and crowd, he said, What is the occasion
of this crowd? They related to him, therefore, the situation in which
they were with regard to Noor-ed-Deen; and when he heard their words, he
hastened to go up to the Sulan, and, having saluted him, acquainted him
with the cause of his coming, and told him, that if any evil event had
happened to 'Alee Noor-ed-Deen, the Khaleefeh would destroy him who was
the cause of it. He then arrested the Sulan, and the Wezeer El-Mo'een
the son of Sawee, and gave orders to liberate 'Alee Noor-ed-Deen, and
enthroned him as Sulan in the place of the Sulan Moammad the son of
Suleyman Ez-Zeynee; after which he remained in El-Barah three days, the
usual period of entertainment; and on the morning of the fourth day,
'Alee Noor-ed-Deen said to Jaafar, I have a longing desire to see the
Prince of the Faithful. So Jaafar said to the King Moammad the son of
Suleyman, Prepare thyself for travelling; for we will perform the
morning-prayers, and depart to Baghdad. He replied, I hear and
obey:--and they performed the morning-prayers, and mounted all together,
with the Wezeer El-Mo'een the son of Sawee, who now repented of what he
had done. As to 'Alee Noor-ed-Deen, he rode by the side of Jaafar: and
they continued their journey until they arrived at Baghdad, the Abode of
Peace.

They then presented themselves before the Khaleefeh, and related to him
the case of Noor-ed-Deen; whereupon the Khaleefeh addressed him, saying,
Take this sword, and strike off with it the head of thine enemy. And he
took it, and approached El-Mo'een the son of Sawee; but he looked at
him, and said to him, I did according to my nature, and do thou
according to thine. And Noor-ed-Deen threw down the sword from his hand,
and, looking towards the Khaleefeh, said, O Prince of the Faithful, he
hath beguiled me. So the Khaleefeh said, Do thou leave him:--and he said
to Mesroor, O Mesroor, advance thou, and strike off his head. Mesroor,
therefore, did so: and upon this, the Khaleefeh said to 'Alee the son of
El-Fal the son of Khakan, Request of me what thou wilt. He replied, O
my lord, I have no want of the sovereignty of El-Barah, and desire
nothing but to have the honour of serving thee.--Most willingly I
assent, said the Khaleefeh:--and he summoned the damsel, and when she
had come before him, he bestowed favours upon them both: he gave to them
one of the palaces of Baghdad, and assigned to them regular allowances,
and made Noor-ed-Deen one of his companions at the table; and he
remained with him until death overtook him.