THE BARBER'S STORY OF HIS SECOND BROTHER.

So I said, Know, O Prince of the Faithful, that my second brother, whose
name was El-Heddar, was going one day to transact some
business, when an old woman met him, and said to him, O man, stop a
little, that I may propose to thee a thing, which, if it please thee,
thou shalt do for me. My brother, therefore, stopped; and she said to
him, I will guide thee to a thing, and rightly direct thee to it, on the
condition that thy words be not many. So he said, Communicate what thou
hast to tell me:--and she proceeded thus:--What sayest thou of a
handsome house, with running water, and fruit and wine, and a beautiful
face to behold, and a smooth cheek to kiss, and an elegant form to
embrace; and to enjoy all these pleasures without interruption? Now, if
thou wilt act agreeably with the condition that I have imposed upon
thee, thou wilt see prosperity.--When my brother had heard her words, he
said to her, O my mistress, how is it that thou hast sought me out in
preference to all the rest of the creation for this affair; and what is
there in me that hath pleased thee? She replied, Did I not say to thee
that thou must not be a person of many words? Be silent then, and come
with me.

The old woman then went her way, my brother following her, eager to
enjoy the pleasures which she had described to him, until they had
entered a spacious house, when she went up with him to an upper story,
and my brother perceived that he was in a beautiful palace, in which he
beheld four damsels, than whom none more lovely had ever been seen,
singing with voices that would charm a heart as insensible as stone. One
of these damsels drank a cup of wine; and my brother said to her, May it
be attended with health and vigour!--and advanced to wait upon her; but
she prevented his doing so, giving him to drink a cup of wine; and as
soon as he had drunk it, she slapped him on his neck. When he found that
she treated him thus, he went out from the chamber in anger, and with
many words; but the old woman, following him, made a sign to him with
her eye that he should return: so he returned, and seated himself,
without speaking; and upon this, the damsel slapped him again upon the
back of his neck until he became senseless; after which, recovering, he
withdrew again. The old woman, however, overtook him, and said to him,
Wait a little, and thou shalt attain thy wish.--How many times, said he,
shall I wait a little before I attain it? The old woman answered, When
she hath become exhilarated with wine thou shalt obtain her favour. He
therefore returned to his place, and resumed his seat. All the four
damsels then arose, and the old woman directed them to divest my brother
of his outer clothes, and to sprinkle some rose-water upon his face; and
when they had done so, the most beautiful one among them said to him,
May Allah exalt thee to honour! Thou hast entered my abode, and if thou
have patience to submit to my requisitions, thou wilt attain thy
wish.--O my mistress, he replied, I am thy slave, and under thy
authority.--Know then, said she, that I am devotedly fond of frolic, and
he who complieth with my demands will obtain my favour. Then she ordered
the other damsels to sing; and they sang so that their hearers were in
an ecstasy; after which the chief lady said to one of the other damsels,
Take thy master, and do what is required, and bring him back to me
immediately.

Accordingly, she took him away, ignorant of that which she was about to
do; and the old woman came to him, and said, Be patient; for there
remaineth but little to do. He then turned towards the damsel, and the
old woman said to him, Be patient: thou hast almost succeeded, and there
remaineth but one thing, which is, to shave thy beard.--How, said he,
shall I do that which will disgrace me among the people? The old woman
answered, She desireth this only to make thee like a beardless youth,
that there may be nothing on thy face to prick her; for her heart is
affected with a violent love for thee. Be patient, therefore, and thou
shalt attain thy desire.--So my brother patiently submitted to the
damsel's directions: his beard was shaven, and he was shorn also of his
eyebrows and mustaches, and his face was painted red, before the damsel
took him back to the chief lady, who, when she saw him, was at first
frightened at him, and then laughed until she fell backwards, and
exclaimed, O my master, thou hast gained me by these proofs of thine
amiable manners! She then conjured him by her life to arise and dance;
and he did so; and there was not a single cushion in the chamber that
she did not throw at him. In like manner also the other damsels threw at
him various things, such as oranges, and limes, and citrons, until he
fell down senseless from the pelting, while they slapped him incessantly
upon the back of his neck, and cast things in his face. But at length
the old woman said to him, Now thou hast attained thy wish. Know that
there remaineth to thee no more beating, nor doth there remain for thee
to do more than one thing, namely, this: it is her custom, when she is
under the influence of wine, to suffer no one to come near her until she
hath taken off her outer clothes; thou, being prepared in the like
manner, must run after her, and she will run before thee as though she
were flying from thee; but cease not to follow her from place to place
until thou overtake her. He arose, therefore, and did so: the lady ran
before, and as he followed her, she passed from chamber to chamber, and
he still ran after her. At last he heard her utter a slight sound as she
ran before him, and, continuing his pursuit, he suddenly found himself
in the midst of the street.

This street was in the market of the leather-sellers, who were then
crying skins for sale; and when the people there collected saw him in
this condition, almost naked, with shaven beard and eyebrows and
mustaches, and with his face painted red, they shouted at him, and
raised a loud laugh, and some of them beat him with the skins until he
became insensible. They then placed him upon an ass, and conducted him
to the Walee, who exclaimed, What is this?--They answered, This
descended upon us from the house of the Wezeer, in this condition. And
the Walee inflicted upon him a hundred lashes, and banished him from the
city: but I went out after him, and brought him back privately into the
city, and allotted him a maintenance. Had it not been for my generous
disposition, I had not borne with such a person.