THE BARBER'S STORY OF HIS FIFTH BROTHER.

My fifth brother (El-Feshshar) was cropped of his ears, O
Prince of the Faithful. He was a pauper, who begged alms by night, and
subsisted upon what he thus acquired by day: and our father was a very
old man, and he fell sick and died, leaving to us seven hundred pieces
of silver, of which each of us took his portion; namely, a hundred
pieces. Now my fifth brother, when he had received his share, was
perplexed, not knowing what to do with it; but while he was in this
state, it occurred to his mind to buy with it all kinds of articles of
glass, and to sell them and make profit; so he bought glass with his
hundred pieces of silver, and put it in a large tray, and sat upon an
elevated place, to sell it, leaning his back against a wall. And as he
sat, he meditated, and said within himself, Verily my whole stock
consisteth of this glass: I will sell it for two hundred pieces of
silver; and with the two hundred I will buy other glass, which I will
sell for four hundred; and thus I will continue buying and selling until
I have acquired great wealth. Then with this I will purchase all kinds
of merchandise and essences and jewels, and so obtain vast gain. After
that, I will buy a handsome house, and memlooks, and horses, and gilded
saddles; and I will eat and drink; and I will not leave in the city a
single female singer but I will have her brought to my house that I may
hear her songs.--All this he calculated with the tray of glass lying
before him.--Then, said he, I will send all the female betrothers to
seek in marriage for me the daughters of Kings and Wezeers; and I will
demand as my wife the daughter of the chief Wezeer; for I
have heard that she is endowed with perfect beauty and surprising
loveliness: and I will give as her dowry a thousand pieces of gold. If
her father consent, my wish is attained; and if he consent not, I will
take her by force, in spite of him: and when I have come back to my
house, I will buy ten young eunuchs, and I will purchase the apparel of
Kings and Sulans, and cause to be made for me a saddle of gold set with
jewels: after which I will ride every day upon a horse, with slaves
behind me and before me, and go about through the streets and
markets to amuse myself, while the people will salute me and pray for
me. Then I will pay a visit to the Wezeer, who is the father
of the maiden, with memlooks behind me and before me, and on my right
hand and on my left; and when he seeth me, he will rise to me, in
humility, and seat me in his own place; and he himself will sit down
below me, because I am his son-in-law. I will then order one
of the servants to bring a purse containing the pieces of gold which
compose the dowry; and he will place it before the Wezeer; and I will
add to it another purse, that he may know my manly spirit and excessive
generosity, and that the world is contemptible in my eye: and when he
addresseth me with ten words, I will answer him with two. And I will
return to my house; and when any person cometh to me from the house of
the Wezeer, I will clothe him with a rich dress: but if any come with a
present, I will return it: I will certainly not accept it.
Then, on the night of the bridal display, I will attire myself in the
most magnificent of my dresses, and sit upon a mattress covered with
silk; and when my wife cometh to me, like the full moon, decked with her
ornaments and apparel, I will command her to stand before me as stands
the timid and the abject; and I will not look at her, on account of the
haughtiness of my spirit and the gravity of my wisdom; so that the maids
will say, O our master and our lord, may we be thy sacrifice! This thy
wife, or rather thy handmaid, awaiteth thy kind regard, and is standing
before thee: then graciously bestow on her one glance; for the posture
hath become painful to her.--Upon this, I will raise my
head, and look at her with one glance, and again incline my head
downwards; and thus I will do until the ceremony of displaying her is
finished; whereupon they will conduct her to the sleeping-chamber; and I
will rise from my place, and go to another apartment, and put on my
night-dress, and go to the chamber in which she is sitting, where I will
seat myself upon the deewan; but I will not look towards her. The
tire-women will urge me to approach her; but I will not hear their
words, and will order some of the attendants to bring a purse containing
five hundred pieces of gold for them, and command them to retire from
the chamber. And when they have gone, I will seat myself by
the side of the bride; but with averted countenance, that she may say,
Verily this is a man of a haughty spirit. Then her mother will come to
me, and will kiss my hands, and say to me, O my master, look upon thy
handmaid with the eye of mercy; for she is submissively standing before
thee. But I will return her no answer. And she will kiss my feet, again
and again, and will say, O my master, my daughter is young, and hath
seen no man but thee; and if she experience from thee repugnance, her
heart will break: incline to her, therefore, and speak to her, and calm
her mind. And upon this I will look at her through the corner of my eye,
and command her to remain standing before me, that she may taste the
savour of humiliation, and know that I am the Sulan of the age. Then
her mother will say to me, O my master, this is thy handmaid: have
compassion upon her, and be gracious to her:--and she will order her to
fill a cup with wine, and to put it to my mouth. So her daughter will
say, O my lord, I conjure thee by Allah that thou reject not the cup
from thy slave; for verily I am thy slave. But I will make her no
reply; and she will urge me to take it, and will say, It must be
drunk:--and will put it to my mouth: and upon this, I will shake my hand
in her face, and spurn her with my foot, and do thus.--So saying, he
kicked the tray of glass, which, being upon a place elevated above the
ground, fell, and all that was in it broke: there escaped nothing: and
he cried out and said, All this is the result of my pride! And he
slapped his face, and tore his clothes; the passengers gazing at him,
while he wept, and exclaimed, Ah! O my grief!