NOTES TO CHAPTER EIGHTH.

NOTE 1. The next story to that of Ghanim, in my original, is one of very
great length, comprising the greater part of the forty-fourth night and
extending to the end of the hundred and forty-fifth; but interrupted by
the contents of my eighth chapter, which consists of two stories of a
very different kind, that appear to have been introduced to relieve its
tediousness. With these, it occupies nearly 162 pages, or not much less
than an eighth part of the whole work. It is the story of the King 'Omar
En-Noaman, and his two sons Sharr-kan and his
daughter Nuzhet-ez-Zeman, &c. It is entirely a fiction, professedly
relating to the first century of the Mohammadan era, "before the reign
of the Khaleefeh 'Abd-El-Melik the son of Marwan;" and its main subject
is a war with two Greek Kings. Taken altogether, I deem it unworthy of a
place in the present series of tales; and so much of it depends upon
incidents of a most objectionable nature, that I cannot attempt to
abridge it; but a pleasant tale might be composed from it by
considerable _alterations_.

One of the two stories which I have extracted from it, that of
Taj-el-Mulook and the Lady Dunya, bears apparent indications of a
Persian origin; but in their present state, the manners and customs &c.
which both exhibit are Arab. The scenes of the events narrated in the
story of Taj-el-Mulook are in Persia and, probably, in India; but
imaginary names appear to be given to the several kingdoms mentioned in
it: the kingdom of El-Ar el-Khara ("the Green Country") and
El-'Amoodeyn (which signifies "the Two Columns") is said to include the
mountains of Ipahan, and its locality is thereby sufficiently
indicated: that of El-Ar el-Beya ("the White Country") I suppose to be
in Persia or India: and as to the Islands of Camphor, I fancy we must be
content to consider them vaguely as appertaining to India: the country
in which 'Azeez and 'Azeezeh resided is said to have been near to the
Islands of Camphor; but their story is perfectly Arab.--The Island of
Camphor is also mentioned in the Story of asan of El-Barah.

NOTE 2. "El-Medeeneh el-Khara" signifies "the Green City." See the
above note.

NOTE 3. "The Compassionate" is an epithet here applied to God.

NOTE 4. See the first note in this series.--"Zahr," in Arabic, signifies
"a Flower."

NOTE 5.--_On Coats of Mail, and other Armour worn by the Arabs._ The
Prophet David is said to have been the first person who manufactured
coats of mail; and the cause of his applying himself to the art was
this.--"He used to go forth in disguise; and when he found any people
who knew him not, he approached them and asked them respecting the
conduct of Daood (or David), and they praised him and prayed for him;
but one day as he was asking questions respecting himself as usual, God
sent to him an angel in the form of a human being, who said, 'An
excellent man were Daood if he did not take from the public
treasury:'--whereupon the heart of Daood was contracted, and he begged
of God to render him independent: so He made iron soft to him, and it
became in his hands as thread; and he used to sell a coat of mail for
four thousand , and
with part of this he obtained food for himself, and part he gave in
alms, and with part he fed his family."--Hence an excellent coat of
mail is often called by the Arabs "Daoodee," _i. e._ "Davidean." This
kind of armour is worn by some Arabs of the Desert in the present day;
but the best specimens, I believe, are mostly found in India. Burckhardt
mentions one tribe of Arabs who have about twenty-five; another, two
hundred; and two others, between thirty and forty. "The dora [properly
dira] is," he remarks, "of two sorts, one covering the whole body like a
long gown from the elbow, over the shoulders, down to the knees: this is
the sirgh: the other, called kembaz, covers the body only to the waist;
the arms from the elbows downwards being covered with two pieces of
steel, fitting into each other, with iron fingers. Thus clad, the Arab
completes his armour by putting on his head an iron cap (tas), which is
but rarely adorned with feathers. The price of a coat of mail fluctuates
from two hundred to fifteen hundred piastres.... Those of the best
quality are capable of resisting a ball." The coat of mail is
sometimes worn within the ordinary outer tunic.

NOTE 6. This implies that his parents were dead.

NOTE 7.--_On Public Royal Feasts._ On certain periodical festivals, and
on other occasions (as those of the kind here described), it has long
been, and still is, a custom of Muslim princes to give public feasts to
all classes of their subjects, in the palace. El-Mareezee quotes a
curious account of the feasts which were given on the festival following
Ramaan to the inhabitants of Cairo, by the Faimee Khaleefehs. At
the upper end of a large saloon was placed the sereer (or couch) of the
monarch, upon which he sat with the Wezeer on his right. Upon this seat
was placed a round silver table, with various delicacies, of which they
alone ate. Before it, and extending nearly from the seat to the other
extremity of the saloon, was set up a kind of table or platform (sima)
of painted wood, resembling a number of benches placed together, ten
cubits (or about eighteen or nineteen feet) in width. Along the middle
of this were arranged twenty-one enormous dishes, each containing
twenty-one baked sheep, three years old, and fat; together with fowls,
chickens, and young pigeons, in number three hundred and fifty of each
kind; all of which were piled together in an oblong form, to the height
of the stature of a man, and enclosed with dry sweetmeat. The spaces
between these dishes were occupied by nearly five hundred other dishes
of earthenware; each of which contained seven fowls, and was filled up
with sweetmeats of various kinds. The table was strewn with flowers;
and cakes of bread made of the finest flower were arranged along each
side. There were also two great edifices of sweetmeats, each weighing
seventeen hundred-weights, which were carried thither by porters with
shoulder-poles; and one of these was placed at the commencement, and the
other at the close, of this sumptuous banquet. When the Khaleefeh and
Wezeer had taken their seats upon the couch, the officers of state who
were distinguished by neck-rings or collars, and the inferior
members of the court, seated themselves in the order of their respective
ranks; and when they had eaten, they gave place to others. Two such
feasts, given on the festival after Ramaan and on the "great festival,"
cost four thousand deenars, or about two thousand pounds sterling.--Two
military officers, named Ibn-Faiz and Ed-Deylemee, distinguished
themselves at these feasts in a very remarkable manner. Each of them
used to eat a baked sheep, and ten fowls dressed with sweetmeats, and
ten pounds of sweetmeats besides, and was presented with a quantity of
food carried away from the feast to his house, together with a large sum
of money. One of them had been a prisoner at 'Asalan; and after he had
remained there some time, the person into whose power he had fallen
jestingly told him that if he would eat a calf belonging to him, the
flesh of which weighed several hundred-weights, he would emancipate him.
This feat he accomplished, and thus he obtained his liberation.

Several cases of a similar kind to those just mentioned are instanced in
a late work. One of a man who, as related by Vopiscus, was brought
before the Emperor Maximilian , and who devoured a whole calf,
and was proceeding to eat up a sheep, but was prevented. Another, of a
man who commenced his repast (in the presence of Dr. Boehmen, of
Wittenberg,) by eating a raw sheep and a sucking pig, and, by way of
dessert, swallowed sixty pounds of prunes, stones and all. A third, of
an attendant of the menagerie of the Botanical Garden in Paris, who used
to devour all the offals of the Theatre of Comparative Anatomy, and ate
a dead lion in one day.

NOTE 8.--_On Litters for Travelling._ The kind of litter borne by mules
is generally one resembling the palkee (or palanquin): it is borne by
four of these animals, two before and two behind, or by two only, or
more commonly by two camels, and sometimes by two horses. When borne by
camels, the head of the hindmost of these animals is painfully bent
down, under the vehicle. It is the most comfortable kind of litter; and
two light persons may travel in it. The name generally given to it is
"takhtarawan," or "takht-rawan;" but the term employed in the passage to
which this note refers is "miaffeh," which is often used as a general
name for a camel-litter, and particularly applied to one with a flat
top.--A very common kind of camel-litter, called "musaa," or "eml
musaa," resembles a small square tent, and is chiefly composed of two
long chests, each of which has a high back: these are placed on the
camel in the same manner as a pair of panniers, one on each side; and
the high backs, which are placed outwards, together with a small pole
resting on the camel's pack-saddle, support the covering which forms
what may be called the tent. This vehicle accommodates two persons. It
is generally open at the front; and may also be opened at the back.
Though it appears comfortable, the motion is uneasy; especially when it
is placed upon a camel that has been accustomed to carry heavy burdens:
but camels of easy pace are generally chosen for bearing
litters.--Another kind of litter, called "shibreeyeh," is composed of a
small square platform with an arched covering. This accommodates but one
person; and is placed on the back of the camel: two saarahs (or square
camel-chests), one on each side of the animal, generally form a
foundation for it.--The musaa and shibreeyeh (but particularly the
latter) are also called "hodaj."

NOTE 9. See Note 43 to Chapter iv.

NOTE 10. See Note 54 to Chapter iv.

NOTE 11. "Taj-el-Mulook" signifies "the Crown of the Kings."

NOTE 12. Lynxes were often employed in the chase in Arabian and other
Eastern countries in former times; but I do not know if they are at
present. See Note 24 to Chapter ii.

NOTE 13. By this word are meant "oblong, cylindrical, hollow beads:"
"aabeh" signifying originally "a reed," "cane," &c.

NOTE 14. The words "who hath taught men," &c., are from the ur-an, ch.
xcvi. v. 5.

NOTE 15. "'Azeez" and "'Azeezeh" (masculine and feminine) signify
"Dear," "Excellent," &c.

NOTE 16. The handkerchief is generally oblong, and each of its two ends
is embroidered with a border of coloured silks and gold; the other two
edges being plain.

NOTE 17. My sheykh has remarked in a marginal note, that this sign may
allude to her heart, or to her sighing because she enjoys not the union
she desires (as expressed immediately after); and that the latter is
more probable, as the action is one common with persons in grief.

NOTE 18.--_On Conversing and Corresponding by means of Signs, Emblems,
Metaphors, &c._ Many persons of the instructed classes, and some others,
among the Arabs, often take delight, and shew much ingenuity and
quickness of apprehension, in conversing and corresponding by means of
signs, emblems, &c., or in a conventional, metaphorical, language, not
understood by the vulgar in general, and sometimes not by any except the
parties engaged in the intercourse. In some cases, when the main
metaphor employed is understood, the rest of the conversation becomes
easily intelligible without any previous explanation; and I have
occasionally succeeded in carrying on a conversation of this kind
(though not in cases such as that described in the tale referred to by
this note); but I have more frequently been unsuccessful in attempting
to divine the nature of a topic in which other persons were engaged. One
simple mode of secret conversation or correspondence is by substituting
certain letters for other letters.

Many of the women are said to be adepts in this art, or science, and to
convey messages, declarations of love, &c., by means of fruits, flowers,
and other emblems. The inability of numbers of females in families of
the middle classes to write or read, as well as the difficulty or
impossibility frequently existing of conveying written letters, may have
given rise to such modes of communication. Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, in
one of her charming letters from the East, has gratified our curiosity
by a Turkish love-letter of this kind. A specimen of one from an
Arab, with its answer, may be here added.--An Arab lover sent to his
mistress a fan, a bunch of flowers, a silk tassel, some sugar-candy, and
a piece of a chord of a musical instrument; and she returned for answer
a piece of an aloe-plant, three black cumin-seeds, and a piece of a
plant used in washing. His communication is thus interpreted:--The
fan, being called "mirwaah," a word derived from a root which has among
its meanings that of "going to any place in the evening," signified his
wish to pay her an evening visit: the flowers, that the interview should
be in her garden: the tassel, being called "shurrabeh," that they should
have sharab (or wine): the sugar-candy, being termed "sukkar
nebat," and "nebat" also signifying "we will pass the night," denoted
his desire to remain in her company until the morning: and the piece of
a chord, that they should be entertained by music. The interpretation of
her answer is as follows:--The piece of an aloe-plant, which is called
"abbarah" (from "abr," which signifies "patience"--because it will
live for many months together without water), implied that he must wait:
the three black cumin-seeds explained to him that the period of delay
should be three nights: and the plant used in washing informed him that
she should then have gone to the bath, and would meet him.--I have
omitted one symbol in the lady's answer, as it conveys an allusion not
so consistent with European as with Arab notions of female delicacy.

The language of flowers employed by the Turks does not exactly agree
with the system illustrated in the story of 'Azeez and 'Azeezeh; for the
former consists of a collection of words and phrases or sentences which
rhyme with the names of the objects used as the signs. This system
is also employed by the Arabs; but I believe not so commonly as the
other.

A remarkable faculty is displayed by some Arabs in catching the meaning
of secret signs employed in written communications to them; such signs
being often used in political and other intrigues. The following is a
curious instance.--The celebrated poet El-Mutanebbee, having written
some verses in dispraise of Kafoor El-Ikhsheedee the independent
Governor of Egypt, was obliged to flee, and hide himself in a distant
town. Kafoor was informed of his retreat, and desired his secretary to
write to him a letter promising him pardon, and commanding him to
return; but told the writer at the same time, that when the poet came he
would punish him. The secretary was a friend of the poet, and, being
obliged to read the letter to the Prince when he had written it, was
perplexed how to convey to El-Mutanebbee some indication of the danger
that awaited him: he could only venture to do so in the exterior
address; and having written this in the usual form, commencing "In
shaa-llah" (If it be the will of God) "this shall arrive," &c., he put a
small mark of reduplication over the "n" in the first word, which he
thus converted into "Inna;" the filial vowel being understood. The poet
read the letter, and was rejoiced to see a promise of pardon; but on
looking a second time at the address, was surprised to observe the mark
of reduplication over the "n." Knowing the writer to be his friend, he
immediately suspected a secret meaning, and rightly conceived that the
sign conveyed an allusion to a passage in the ur-an commencing with the
word "Inna," and this he divined to be the following:--"Verily the
magistrates are deliberating concerning thee, to put thee to
death." Accordingly, he fled to another town.--Some authors add,
that he wrote a reply, conveying, by a similar sign, to his friend, an
allusion to another passage in the ur-an:--"We will never enter the
country while they remain therein."--It is probable that signs thus
employed were used by many persons to convey allusions to certain words;
and such may have been the case in the above-mentioned instance: if not,
the poet was indeed a wonderful guesser.

NOTE 19. Perhaps it is unnecessary to explain that the actions here
described are those of a dyer, dipping a piece of linen into a red dye,
and then wringing it. The shop of the dyer is generally, like most other
shops, a small chamber or recess open towards the street. Pans
containing the different dyes are imbedded in its floor.

NOTE 20. "Ma'ad" is a name generally given to a chamber in which male
guests or visiters are received, having an open front with two or more
arches, and looking into the court or garden of the house. Its floor is
elevated about ten or more feet above the ground, and the front is
usually towards the north, or nearly so.

NOTE 21. I suppose it to be meant, that these designs were executed in a
kind of mosaic work; for the pool of the fountain is generally
ornamented with black and white marble, and pieces of fine red tile,
inlaid in complicated and tasteful patterns. A view and plan of a
fountain of this kind are inserted in the Introduction to my work on the
Modern Egyptians.

NOTE 22. "Balaweh," from the Turkish "balava," is a name given to a
kind of pastry, which is generally thus prepared:--A paste made of fine
flour with clarified butter is rolled thin, and laid upon a tray: upon
this paste is then spread a composition of clarified butter and blanched
almonds (and sometimes walnuts and currants) beaten small; and over this
is put another layer of paste. Eight of these double layers of paste
with the composition above mentioned between them are placed one upon
another, making the whole about an inch thick. It is baked in an oven;
cut into lozenge-shaped pieces, about three inches long, and two inches
wide; and after it is thus cut, some honey or treacle is poured over.

NOTE 23. See Note 99 to Chapter v.

NOTE 24. It is a general belief of the Muslims that the wicked will rise
to judgment with their faces black; and hence the origin of the
imprecation, "May God blacken thy face!" But it is often used to signify
"May God disgrace thee!" for a person's face is said to be black when he
is in any disgrace; and in the reverse case, it is said to be
white.

NOTE 25. "Zardeh" (which is a Persian word) is a name given to rice
dressed with honey and saffron; but here it appears to be applied to a
sweet drink infused with saffron.

NOTE 26. By the play-bone and the ab-stick an allusion is conveyed to
two games common among the Arabs. The play-bones are used in the same
manner as dice, of which they are probably the origin; and both bear the
same name in the Arabic, in the singular "kaab" or "kaabeh," that is, "a
cube." Of the game of ab I have given a full account in my work on the
Modern Egyptians (vol. ii. ch. iv.). I need only mention here, that the
ab-stick is of a flat form, about a span (or eight inches) in length,
and two-thirds of an inch in breadth, generally formed of a piece of a
palm-branch; one side of which, being cut flat and smooth, is white; the
other, green, or, if not fresh, of a dull yellow colour. Four such
sticks are used in playing the game.

NOTE 27. The more simple interpretation is this:--Idle games are more
suited to thee than affairs of love.

NOTE 28. El-azweenee makes a remark somewhat similar to this at the
close of his account of the date; but the interpretation of the meaning
conveyed by the date-stone in our text is very far-fetched: my sheykh,
in a marginal note, gives one perfectly apposite: the date-stone is
called "nawayeh," and more properly "nawah" and "nawa;" and the last of
these words signifies also "distance," "absence," &c., and is often used
to express the state of one who is far from loving or being a lover: it
implies also, in this case, that, if he slept again, she would cast him
off.

NOTE 29. The locust-fruit, by its dark colour, and the length of time it
remains in a state of preservation after it has been plucked, is
rendered a fit emblem of a heart long enduring separation from the
object of its love.

NOTE 30. "Dirhem," I have before mentioned, is the name of a silver
coin: it is also the name of a weight, very nearly equivalent to
forty-eight English grains; and being here described as of iron, we must
understand it in the latter sense.

NOTE 31. I suppose the iron dirhem to be symbolic of the eye because it
is round, and perhaps likewise because the Arabic term for "iron"
(namely "adeed") has also the signification of "sharp" or "piercing;"
in which sense it is often applied to the sight (as in the ur-an, ch.
l. v. 21). See the next note.

NOTE 32. From this double oath, it seems to me probable, that, by the
circular form of the dirhem, an allusion was meant to God (as being
without beginning or end), and that the matter of which it was composed
(from what I have said in the note immediately preceding), as well as
its form, conveyed the allusion to the eye.

NOTE 33. This gentle kneading or pressing of the limbs, which is one of
the operations performed in the bath, is often practised by the Arabs
for the purpose of inducing sleep.

NOTE 34. This is a kind of nebeedh. (See Note 22 to Chapter iii.) The
same fruit is also stewed with meat. It is called in Arabic "'onnab."

NOTE 35. See Note 18 to Chapter vii.

NOTE 36. It is seen that 'Azeezeh speaks of herself in the masculine
gender in the verses here inserted; but this is in accordance with a
common Arab custom.

NOTE 37.--_On the Ceremony called_ Zikr. Zikrs are very often
performed after a death; the merit of the performance being transferred
to the soul of the deceased.

I have before mentioned these ceremonies (in Note 63 to Chapter iii.);
but in a vague manner; and as it is my object in the present work to
give such illustrations as will satisfy the general reader, without
obliging him to refer to other books, I shall here insert an abridged
extract, descriptive of a zikr, from my Account of the Manners and
Customs of the Modern Egyptians.

The zikkeers (or performers of the zikr), who were about thirty in
number, sat, cross-legged, upon matting extended close to the houses on
one side of the street, in the form of an oblong ring. Within this
ring, along the middle of the matting, were placed three very large wax
candles; each about four feet high, and stuck in a low candlestick. Most
of the zikkeers were Amedee darweeshes, persons of the lower orders,
and meanly dressed: many of them wore green turbans. At one end of the
ring were four munshids (or singers of religious odes), and with them
was a player on the kind of flute called "nay." I procured a small seat
of palm-sticks from a coffee-shop close by, and, by means of a little
pushing, and the assistance of my servant, obtained a place with the
munshids, and sat there to hear a complete act, or "meglis," of the
zikr; which act commenced at about three o'clock (or three hours after
sunset), and continued two hours.

The performers began by reciting the Fat'ah (or opening chapter of the
ur-an) all together; their sheykh, or chief, first exclaiming,
"El-Fat'ah!" They then chanted the following words;--"O God, bless our
lord Moammad among the former generations; and bless our lord Moammad
among the latter generations; and bless our lord Moammad in every time
and period; and bless our lord Moammad in the highest degree, unto the
day of judgment; and bless all the prophets and apostles among the
inhabitants of the heavens and of the earth; and may God (whose name be
blessed and exalted!) be well pleased with our lords and our masters,
those persons of illustrious estimation, Aboo-Bekr and 'Omar and 'Osman
and 'Alee, and with all the favourites of God. God is our sufficiency;
and excellent is the Guardian! There is no strength nor power but in
God, the High, the Great! O God! O our Lord! O Thou liberal of pardon! O
Thou most bountiful of the most bountiful! O God! Amen!"--They were then
silent for three or four minutes; and again recited the Fat'ah; but
silently. This form of prefacing the zikr is commonly used, by almost
all orders of darweeshes in Egypt.

The performers now commenced the zikr. Sitting in the manner above
described, they chanted, in slow measure, "La ilaha illa-llah" ("There
is no deity but God") to the following air:--

  La i - la - ha illa - l - lah.
  La i - la - ha i - l - la - l - la - h.
  La i - la - ha illa - l - lah.

bowing the head and body twice in each repetition of "La ilaha
illa-llah." Thus they continued about a quarter of an hour; and then,
for about the same space of time, they repeated the same words to the
same air, but in a quicker measure, and with correspondingly quicker
motions. In the meantime, the munshids frequently sang, to the same, or
a variation of the same, air, portions of a aeedeh, or of a
muweshsha; an ode of a similar nature to the Song of Solomon, generally
alluding to the Prophet as the object of love and praise; and at
frequent intervals, one of them sang out the word "meded," implying an
invocation for spiritual or supernatural aid.

The zikkeers, after having performed as above described, next repeated
the same words to a different air for about the same length of time;
first, very slowly; then, quickly. The air was as follows:--

  La i - la - ha illa - l - la - h.
  La i - la - ha illa - l - la - h.
  La i - la - ha illa - l - lah.

Then they repeated these words again, to the following air, in the same
manner:--

  La i - la - ha il - la - l - lah.
  La i - la - ha il - la - l - lah.

They next rose, and, standing in the same order in which they had been
sitting, repeated the same words to another air. After which, still
standing, they repeated these words in a very deep and hoarse tone;
laying the principal emphasis upon the word "La" and the first syllable
of the last word "Allah;" and uttering it, apparently, with a
considerable effort: the sound much resembled that which is produced by
beating the rim of a tambourine. Each zikkeer turned his head
alternately to the right and left at each repetition of "La ilaha
illa-llah." One of them, a eunuch, at this part of the zikr, was seized
with an epileptic fit, evidently the result of a high state of religious
excitement; but nobody seemed surprised at it; for occurrences of this
kind at zikrs are not uncommon. All the performers now seemed much
excited; repeating their ejaculations with greater rapidity, violently
turning their heads, and sinking the whole body at the same time: some
of them jumping. The eunuch above mentioned again was seized with fits
several times; and I generally remarked that this happened after one of
the munshids had sung a line or two and exerted himself more than
usually to excite his hearers: the singing was, indeed, to my taste,
very pleasing. The contrast presented by the vehement and distressing
exertions of the performers at the close of the zikr, and their calm
gravity and solemnity of manner at the commencement, was particularly
striking. Money was collected during the performance for the munshids.
The zikkeers receive no pay.

NOTE 38. From the last of these verses it appears that the flowers are
described as _laid_ upon the tomb (in accordance with the custom
mentioned in the last paragraph of Note 16 to Chapter i.), and not as
_planted_ upon it; though this is frequently done in some countries of
the East; the monument being filled with mould, and the whole of its top
open.

NOTE 39. See Note 25 to Chapter v.

NOTE 40. See Note 35 to Chapter ii.

NOTE 41. The "rod" (in Arabic "aabeh") was, according to the Egyptian
measurement, until lately reduced, about twelve English feet and a half.

NOTE 42. See Note 12 to Chapter iii.

NOTE 43. It is common (as my sheykh has remarked) to say, of a very
spacious chamber, that a horseman might gallop in it. The playing at
goff by horsemen has been mentioned in a former tale. It was a common
exercise in Egypt as well as Persia and other Eastern countries.

NOTE 44. "Deleeleh" is an epithet used in modern Arabic as indicative of
artifice, machination, or fraud. It is often employed as a female
nickname.

NOTE 45. From this point to the end of the story of 'Azeez and 'Azeezeh
I omit some portions which are tedious, and others which are more
objectionable.

NOTE 46. Any one may enter the public bath, but none can go out of it,
without paying.

NOTE 47. The "kaak," commonly called "kak," has been described in Note
16 to Chapter i. De Sacy has remarked that our English word "cake" seems
to be from the same origin.

NOTE 48.--_On Oaths._ To explain this passage, I must repeat, with a few
slight additions, some remarks which I have made in a former
publication.--Among a people by whom falsehood, in certain cases,
is not only allowed but commended, oaths of different kinds are
more or less binding. In considering this subject, we should also
remember that oaths may sometimes be expiated. There are some
oaths which, I believe, few Muslims would falsely take; such as saying,
three times, "By God the Great!" (Wa-llahi-l-Aeem), and the oath upon
the mu-af (or copy of the ur-an), saying, "By what this contains of
the word of God!" This latter is rendered more binding by placing a
sword with the sacred volume; and still more so, by the addition of a
cake, or piece, of bread, and a handful of salt. But a form of oath
which is generally yet more to be depended upon is that of saying, "I
impose upon myself divorcement!" (that is, "the divorce of my wife, if
what I say be false"); or, "I impose upon myself interdiction!" which
has a similar meaning ("My wife be unlawful to me!"); or, "I impose upon
myself a triple divorcement!" which binds a man by the irrevocable
divorce of his wife. If a man use any of these three forms of oath
falsely, his wife, if he have but one, is divorced by the oath itself,
if proved to be false, without the absolute necessity of any further
ceremony; and if he have two or more wives, he must, under such
circumstances, choose one of them to put away.

In the case which this note is principally intended to illustrate, the
wife of 'Azeez makes him swear by the sword and the ur-an in the hope
of inducing him to return to her; and by the oath of divorce, to make
the inducement more strong, and that she might be enabled, in case he
did not fulfil his vow, legally to contract another marriage as soon as
she should have waited the period which the law requires.

NOTE 49. The verses I have omitted as they are the same (with the
exception of some slight variations) as the first, second, third, and
fifth, of those commencing at page 185 in this volume; and the contents
of the accompanying paper as being tiresome and in some parts unmeaning.

NOTE 50. See the first note in the present series.

NOTE 51. I have substituted "Shah-Zeman" (signifying "King of the Age")
for Shahraman; the latter being evidently a mistake of a copyist.

NOTE 52. "Dunya" signifies the "world."

NOTE 53. "Riwan," which signifies "approbation," "complacency," &c., is
the name of the Guardian of Paradise.--The meaning of this passage is,
"Surely this handsome young person is one of the Wildan, or Weleeds,
those beautiful youths prepared to wait upon the faithful in Paradise;
and he hath escaped thence through the inadvertence of Riwan." The very
meanest in Paradise is promised eighty thousand of these servants,
besides seventy-two ooreeyehs, &c.

NOTE 54. A compliment of this kind is generally uttered on letting a
shop or house, and on selling an article of dress, &c.; and "God bless
thee!" is usually said in reply. In like manner, a merchant selling
goods to be re-sold says, "May God grant thee a profit upon them!"

NOTE 55. The word thus translated signifies taking a morning-draught of
wine, milk, sherbet, or any other beverage.

NOTE 56. When Zeleekha invited her female friends that they might behold
Yoosuf (or Joseph) and excuse her for inclining to him, at the sight of
him they cut their own hands, and praised God, ejaculating these words,
"This is not a mortal," &c. (ur-an, ch. xii. v. 31).

NOTE 57. To persons more or less above him in rank, the shopkeeper rises
and stands, or merely makes a slight motion as if he were about to rise.

NOTE 58. This is a common invocation, for the protection of a person
from envy, or the evil eye, founded upon the last chapter but one of the
ur-an, in which the believer is desired to "seek refuge with the Lord
of the Daybreak" from various evils, and among these "from the mischief
of the envious." It is very often said to imply admiration of a child,
that the mother may not fear.

NOTE 59. This ejaculation is addressed to God.

NOTE 60. This alludes to one of the stages of the creation of man
explained in the ur-an, ch. xxii. v. 5.

NOTE 61. The old woman is described as being "full of joy" because,
having induced her mistress to answer the letter, she saw a prospect of
continuing the correspondence, and so obtaining additional presents.

NOTE 62. "Es-Suha" is an obscure star in the Greater Bear, at which
people look to try their powers of sight. It is the star 80, by [Greek:
z].

NOTE 63. My sheykh has remarked in a marginal note on the "Five Elders"
or Sheykhs here mentioned, "the known number is the four; namely the
 Khaleefehs; or the Four Welees (eminent saints), the seyyid
El-Bedawee and the seyyid Ed-Dasooee and Er-Rifa'ee and El-Geelanee."
The latter four are often mentioned together as being the saints
generally most esteemed in the present day and the founders of the four
principal orders of Darweeshes.--Who, then, can be meant by "the Five
Elders" I do not know; but I have retained this number as it occurs
again in a variation of the same verses in a subsequent tale, which is
almost exactly the same as that of Taj-el-Mulook.

NOTE 64. "Ibn-Seena" ("Son of Seena") is the true name of the great
physician called by us "Avicenna."

NOTE 65. The gait of Arab ladies is very remarkable: they incline the
lower part of the body from side to side as they step, and with the
hands raised to the level of the bosom they hold the edges of their
outer covering. Their pace is slow, and they look not about them, but
keep their eyes towards the ground in the direction to which they are
going.

NOTE 66. It should be remarked here, that the private room of an Eastern
princess is not to be regarded as a Western bed-room. In the East, a
guest may lay himself down upon a deewan in the presence of another, to
pass the night, without any infringement of decorum.

NOTE 67. See the latter paragraph of the first note in the present
series.

NOTE 68. See Note 9 to Chapter vii.

NOTE 69. The doors in Eastern houses generally turn on two wooden pins;
one fitting into a hole in the lintel; the other, into a hole
immediately behind the threshold; and the latter is very short. It is
therefore often easy to displace a door by raising it a little, which
may be done by means of a projecting wooden lock; and in many cases,
when the door cannot be displaced from its sockets, it may be raised
sufficiently to remove the inner latch from its catch. The doors of the
ancient temples and tombs in Egypt were formed as above described, with
pins, which were often made of bronze.

NOTE 70. I here read "nimsheh" (also written "nimjeh" and "nimjah"--from
the Persian "neemjah") instead of "amsheh." The latter is described by
my sheykh, in a marginal note, as "a strip of leather divided into two,
and tied together and nailed at the upper end to a piece of wood;" but
the use of such an instrument in this case would be ridiculous. The name
of "nimsheh" is often given to a royal dagger.

NOTE 71. As persons are often decapitated in an Eastern palace, a skin
is made use of to receive the head and the blood. I believe it to be
similar to the round skin used by travellers to eat upon; which is
converted into a bag by means of a running string round the edge.

In concluding the present series of notes, I may state my opinion, that
the two stories to which they relate are fully worthy of insertion in
this collection, as extending the picture of _Arab_ life and manners,
whatever may be thought of their _origin_.


   Thus commonly pronounced for "Sharrun kan," signifying
  "an evil hath come into existence." Names of this kind are
  sometimes given by the Arabs not in dispraise, but as prophetic
  of great achievements.

   "Light of the Place."

   "Delight of the Age."

   Mir-at ez-Zeman.

   "Notes on the Bedouins and Wahabys," 8vo. vol. i. pp. 55
  and 56.

   The Dynasty of the Faimee Khaleefehs was founded by
  El-Mahdee in Western Africa, in the year of the Flight 297. His
  third successor, El-Mo'ezz li-deeni-llah, conquered Egypt in
  the year 358, and the seat of his government was transferred to
  Cairo. As they claimed descent from Faimeh, and were of the
  Shiya'ee sect, their possession of the fairest province of the
  orthodox (or 'Abbasee) Khaleefehs forms a strange episode in
  the history of El-Islam.--Their power was overthrown by
  ala-ed-Deen, in the year 567.--ED.

   See Note 15 to Chapter ii.

   "El-Khia:" Account of the Palaces of the Khaleefehs.

   Dr. Millengen's Curiosities of Medical Experience, quoted
  in the Literary Gazette, No. 1043.

   The art here mentioned was first made known to Europeans
  by a Frenchman, M. Du Vigneau, in a work entitled "Secretaire
  Turc, contenant l'Art d'exprimer ses pensees sans se voir, sans
  se parler, et sans s'ecrire:" Paris, 1688: in-12.--Von Hammer
  has also given an interesting paper on this subject in the
  "Mines de l'Orient," No. 1: Vienna, 1809. (Note to Marcel's
  "Contes du Cheykh El-Mohdy," vol. iii. pp. 327 and 328: Paris,
  1833.)

   Called "ghasool el-azrar." In Delile's Flora Egyptiaca,
  the name of ghasool is given to the mesembryanthemum
  nodiflorum, class icosandria, order pentagynia.

   This name is now given to sherbet.

   albet el-Kumeyt, ch. x.--The aloe-plant is called
  "abir," "abr," "ibr," and "abbarah." The second of these
  words signifies "patience;" and so does the root of _all_ of
  them: and the last signifies "very patient." The _reason_ of
  its having these appellations cannot, of course, be _proved_.

   See Marcel, _ubi supra_. He states that Von Hammer's
  vocabulary of flowers and other hieroglyphic objects contains
  120 articles; and that of Du Vigneau, 179; almost all of the
  former being the same as those of the latter.

   Ch. xxviii. v. 19.

  37 5: Ch. v. v. 27.--This anecdote is from the albet
  el-Kumeyt, ch. viii.--[Kafoor was a black eunuch purchased by
  El-Ikhsheed, the first of the virtually-independent dynasty of
  the Ikhsheedeeyeh, which fell before the Faimee Khaleefehs.
  Kafoor was regent of Egypt for upwards of twenty years, during
  the reigns of his master's two sons; and was actual governor
  from the year of the Flight 355 to 357.--ED.]

   Sometimes, also, it means "May God cause thee to
  experience grief!" or "sorrow!" and, used in this sense, it is
  similar to the phrase, often occurring in this work, "the world
  became black before his face."

   The zikr here described was performed near the tomb of a
  saint, for whose sake it was celebrated. The ceremony is often
  performed in a sepulchral mosque, and often in the court, or in
  a chamber, of a private house.

   Marginal note by my sheykh.

   Idem.

   The "Modern Egyptians."

   See Note 57 to Chapter iii.

   As shewn in Note 68 to Chapter iv.
