THE BARBER'S STORY OF HIMSELF

I was living in Baghdad, in the reign of the Prince of the Faithful
El-Muntair bi-llah, who loved the poor and indigent, and
associated with the learned and virtuous; and it happened, one day, that
he was incensed against ten persons, in consequence of which, he ordered
the chief magistrate of Baghdad to bring them to him in a boat. I saw
them, and I said within myself, These persons have assembled for nothing
but an entertainment, and, I suppose, will pass their day in this boat
eating and drinking; and none shall be their companion but
myself:--so I embarked, and mixed myself among them; and when
they had landed on the opposite bank, the guards of the Walee came with
chains, and put them upon their necks, and put a chain upon my neck
also.--Now this, O people, is it not a proof of my generosity, and of my
paucity of speech? For I determined not to speak.--They took us,
therefore, all together, in chains, and placed us before El-Muntair
bi-llah, the Prince of the Faithful; whereupon he gave orders to strike
off the heads of the ten; and the executioner struck off the heads of
the ten, and I remained. The Khaleefeh then turning his eyes, and
beholding me, said to the executioner, Wherefore dost thou not strike
off the heads of all the ten? He answered, I have beheaded every one of
the ten.--I do not think, rejoined the Khaleefeh, that thou hast
beheaded more than nine; and this who is before me is the tenth. But the
executioner replied, By thy beneficence, they are ten.--Count them, said
the Khaleefeh. And they counted them; and lo, they were ten. The
Khaleefeh then looked towards me, and said, What hath induced thee to
be silent on this occasion; and how hast thou become included among the
men of blood?--And when I heard the address of the Prince of the
Faithful, I said to him, Know, O Prince of the Faithful, that I am the
sheykh E-amit (the silent): I possess, of science, a large stock; and
as to the gravity of my understanding, and the quickness of my
apprehension, and the paucity of my speech, they are unbounded: my trade
is that of a barber; and yesterday, early in the morning, I saw these
ten men proceeding to the boat; whereupon I mixed myself with them, and
embarked with them, thinking that they had met together for an
entertainment; but soon it appeared that they were criminals; and the
guards came to them, and put chains upon their necks, and upon my neck
also they put a chain; and from the excess of my generosity I was
silent, and spoke not: my speech was not heard on that occasion, on
account of the excess of my generosity; and they proceeded with us until
they stationed us before thee, and thou gavest the order to strike off
the heads of the ten, and I remained before the executioner, and
acquainted you not with my case. Was not this great generosity which
compelled me to accompany them to slaughter? But throughout my life I
have acted in this excellent manner.

When the Khaleefeh heard my words, and knew that I was of a very
generous character, and of few words, and not inclined to impertinence
as this young man, whom I delivered from horrors, asserteth, he said,
Hast thou brothers? I answered, Yes: six.--And are thy six brothers,
said he, like thyself, distinguished by science and knowledge, and
paucity of speech? I answered, They lived not so as to be like me: thou
hast disparaged me by thy supposition, O Prince of the Faithful, and it
is not proper that thou shouldst compare my brothers to me; for through
the abundance of their speech, and the smallness of their generous
qualities, each of them experienced a defect: the first was lame; the
second, deprived of many of his teeth; the third, blind; the fourth,
one-eyed; the fifth, cropped of his ears; and the sixth had both his
lips cut off: and think not, O Prince of the Faithful, that I
am a man of many words: nay, I must prove to thee that I am of a more
generous character than they; and each of them met with a particular
adventure, in consequence of which he experienced a defect: if thou
please, I will relate their stories to thee.