COMMENCING WITH PART OF THE THIRD NIGHT, AND ENDING WITH PART OF THE
NINTH.

THE STORY OF THE FISHERMAN.

There was a certain fisherman, advanced in age, who had a wife and three
children; and though he was in indigent circumstances, it was his custom
to cast his net, every day, no more than four times. One day he went
forth at the hour of noon to the shore of the sea, and put down his
basket, and cast his net, and waited until it was motionless in the
water, when he drew together its strings, and found it to be heavy: he
pulled, but could not draw it up: so he took the end of the cord, and
knocked a stake into the shore, and tied the cord to it. He then
stripped himself, and dived round the net, and continued to pull until
he drew it out: whereupon he rejoiced, and put on his clothes; but when
he came to examine the net, he found in it the carcass of an ass. At the
sight of this he mourned, and exclaimed, There is no strength nor power
but in God, the High, the Great! This is a strange piece of
fortune!--And he repeated the following verse:--

  O thou who occupiest thyself in the darkness of night, and in peril!
    Spare thy trouble; for the support of Providence is not obtained
    by toil!

He then disencumbered his net of the dead ass, and wrung it out; after
which he spread it, and descended into the sea, and--exclaiming, In the
name of God!--cast it again, and waited till it had sunk and was still,
when he pulled it, and found it more heavy and more difficult to raise
than on the former occasion. He therefore concluded that it was full of
fish: so he tied it, and stripped, and plunged and dived, and pulled
until he raised it, and drew it upon the shore; when he found in it only
a large jar, full of sand and mud; on seeing which, he was troubled in
his heart, and repeated the following words of the poet:--

  O angry fate, forbear! or, if thou wilt not forbear, relent!
  Neither favour from fortune do I gain, nor profit from the work
    of my hands,
  I came forth to seek my sustenance, but have found it to be exhausted.
  How many of the ignorant are in splendour! and how many of the wise,
    in obscurity!

So saying, he threw aside the jar, and wrung out and cleansed his net;
and, begging the forgiveness of God for his impatience, returned to the
sea the third time, and threw the net, and waited till it had sunk and
was motionless: he then drew it out, and found in it a quantity of
broken jars and pots.

Upon this, he raised his head towards heaven, and said, O God, Thou
knowest that I cast not my net more than four times; and I have now cast
it three times! Then--exclaiming, In the name of God!--he cast the net
again into the sea, and waited till it was still; when he attempted to
draw it up, but could not, for it clung to the bottom. And he exclaimed,
There is no strength nor power but in God!--and stripped himself again,
and dived round the net, and pulled it until he raised it upon the
shore; when he opened it, and found in it a bottle of brass,
filled with something, and having its mouth closed with a stopper of
lead, bearing the impression of the seal of our lord Suleyman.
At the sight of this, the fisherman was rejoiced, and said, This I
will sell in the copper-market; for it is worth ten pieces of gold.
He then shook it, and found it to be heavy, and said, I must open it,
and see what is in it, and store it in my bag; and then I will
sell the bottle in the copper-market. So he took out a knife, and
picked at the lead until he extracted it from the bottle. He then laid
the bottle on the ground, and shook it, that its contents might pour
out; but there came forth from it nothing but smoke, which ascended
towards the sky, and spread over the face of the earth; at which he
wondered excessively. And after a little while, the smoke collected
together, and was condensed, and then became agitated, and was converted
into an 'Efreet, whose head was in the clouds, while his feet rested
upon the ground: his head was like a dome: his hands were
like winnowing forks; and his legs, like masts: his mouth
resembled a cavern: his teeth were like stones; his nostrils, like
trumpets; and his eyes, like lamps; and he had dishevelled
and dust-coloured hair.



When the fisherman beheld this 'Efreet, the muscles of his sides
quivered, his teeth were locked together, his spittle dried up, and he
saw not his way. The 'Efreet, as soon as he perceived him, exclaimed,
There is no deity but God: Suleyman is the Prophet of God. O Prophet of
God, slay me not; for I will never again oppose thee in word, or rebel
against thee in deed!--O Marid, said the fisherman, dost thou say,
Suleyman is the Prophet of God? Suleyman hath been dead a thousand and
eight hundred years; and we are now in the end of time. What is thy
history, and what is thy tale, and what was the cause of thy entering
this bottle? When the Marid heard these words of the fisherman, he said,
There is no deity but God! Receive news, O fisherman!--Of what, said the
fisherman, dost thou give me news? He answered, Of thy being instantly
put to a most cruel death. The fisherman exclaimed, Thou deservest, for
this news, O master of the 'Efreets, the withdrawal of protection from
thee, O thou remote! Wherefore wouldst thou kill me? and what
requires thy killing me, when I have liberated thee from the bottle, and
rescued thee from the bottom of the sea, and brought thee up upon the
dry land?--The 'Efreet answered, Choose what kind of death thou wilt
die, and in what manner thou shalt be killed.--What is my offence, said
the fisherman, that this should be my recompense from thee? The 'Efreet
replied, Hear my story, O fisherman.--Tell it then, said the fisherman,
and be short in thy words; for my soul hath sunk down to my feet.

Know then, said he, that I am one of the heretical Jinn: I rebelled
against Suleyman the son of Daood: I and akhr the Jinnee;
and he sent to me his Wezeer, Aaf the son of Barkhiya, who came upon me
forcibly, and took me to him in bonds, and placed me before him: and
when Suleyman saw me, he offered up a prayer for protection against me,
and exhorted me to embrace the faith, and to submit to his authority;
but I refused; upon which he called for this bottle, and confined me in
it, and closed it upon me with the leaden stopper, which he stamped with
the Most Great Name: he then gave orders to the Jinn, who carried me
away, and threw me into the midst of the sea. There I remained a hundred
years; and I said in my heart, Whosoever shall liberate me, I will
enrich him for ever:--but the hundred years passed over me, and no one
liberated me: and I entered upon another hundred years; and I said,
Whosoever shall liberate me, I will open to him the treasures of the
earth;--but no one did so: and four hundred years more passed over me,
and I said, Whosoever shall liberate me, I will perform for him three
wants:--but still no one liberated me. I then fell into a violent rage,
and said within myself, Whosoever shall liberate me now, I will kill
him; and only suffer him to choose in what manner he will die. And lo,
now thou hast liberated me, and I have given thee thy choice of the
manner in which thou wilt die.

When the fisherman had heard the story of the 'Efreet, he exclaimed, O
Allah! that I should not have liberated thee but in such a time as this!
Then said he to the 'Efreet, Pardon me, and kill me not, and so may God
pardon thee; and destroy me not, lest God give power over thee to one
who will destroy thee. The Marid answered, I must positively kill thee;
therefore choose by what manner of death thou wilt die. The fisherman
then felt assured of his death; but he again implored the 'Efreet,
saying, Pardon me by way of gratitude for my liberating thee.--Why,
answered the 'Efreet, I am not going to kill thee but for that very
reason, because thou hast liberated me.--O Sheykh of the 'Efreets, said
the fisherman, do I act kindly towards thee, and dost thou recompense me
with baseness? But the proverb lieth not that saith,--

  We did good to them, and they returned us the contrary; and such,
    by my life, is the conduct of the wicked.
  Thus he who acteth kindly to the undeserving is recompensed in
    the same manner as the aider of Umm-'Amir.



The 'Efreet, when he heard these words, answered by saying, Covet not
life, for thy death is unavoidable. Then said the fisherman within
himself, This is a Jinnee, and I am a man; and God hath given me sound
reason; therefore, I will now plot his destruction with my art and
reason, like as he hath plotted with his cunning and perfidy. So he said
to the 'Efreet, Hast thou determined to kill me? He answered, Yes. Then
said he, By the Most Great Name engraved upon the seal of Suleyman, I
will ask thee one question; and wilt thou answer it to me truly? On
hearing the mention of the Most Great Name, the 'Efreet was agitated,
and trembled, and replied, Yes; ask, and be brief. The fisherman then
said, How wast thou in this bottle? It will not contain thy hand or thy
foot; how then can it contain thy whole body?--Dost thou not believe
that I was in it? said the 'Efreet. The fisherman answered, I will never
believe thee until I see thee in it. Upon this, the 'Efreet shook, and
became converted again into smoke, which rose to the sky, and then
became condensed, and entered the bottle by little and little, until it
was all enclosed; when the fisherman hastily snatched the sealed leaden
stopper, and, having replaced it in the mouth of the bottle, called out
to the 'Efreet, and said, Choose in what manner of death thou wilt die.
I will assuredly throw thee here into the sea, and build me a house on
this spot; and whosoever shall come here, I will prevent his fishing in
this place, and will say to him, Here is an 'Efreet, who, to any person
that liberates him, will propose various kinds of death, and then give
him his choice of one of them. On hearing these words of the fisherman,
the 'Efreet endeavoured to escape; but could not, finding himself
restrained by the impression of the seal of Suleyman, and thus
imprisoned by the fisherman as the vilest and filthiest and least of
'Efreets. The fisherman then took the bottle to the brink of the sea.
The 'Efreet exclaimed, Nay! nay!--to which the fisherman answered, Yea,
without fail! yea, without fail! The Marid then addressing him with a
soft voice and humble manner, said, What dost thou intend to do with me,
O fisherman? He answered, I will throw thee into the sea; and if thou
hast been there a thousand and eight hundred years, I will make thee to
remain there until the hour of judgment. Did I not say to thee, Spare
me, and so may God spare thee; and destroy me not, lest God destroy
thee? But thou didst reject my petition, and wouldest nothing but
treachery; therefore God hath caused thee to fall into my hand, and I
have betrayed thee.--Open to me, said the 'Efreet, that I may confer
benefits upon thee. The fisherman replied, Thou liest, thou accursed! I
and thou are like the Wezeer of King Yoonan and the sage
Dooban.--What, said the 'Efreet, was the case of the Wezeer of
King Yoonan and the sage Dooban, and what is their story? The fisherman
answered as follows:--


THE STORY OF KING YOONAN AND THE SAGE DOOBAN.

Know, O 'Efreet, that there was, in former times, in the country of the
Persians, a monarch who was called King Yoonan, possessing great
treasures and numerous forces, valiant, and having troops of every
description; but he was afflicted with leprosy, which the physicians and
sages had failed to remove; neither their potions, nor powders, nor
ointments were of any benefit to him; and none of the physicians was
able to cure him. At length there arrived at the city of this king a
great sage, stricken in years, who was called the sage Dooban: he was
acquainted with ancient Greek, Persian, modern Greek, Arabic, and Syriac
books, and with medicine and astrology, both with respect to their
scientific principles and the rules of their practical applications for
good and evil; as well as the properties of plants, dried and fresh,
the injurious and the useful: he was versed in the wisdom of the
philosophers, and embraced a knowledge of all the medical and other
sciences.

After this sage had arrived in the city, and remained in it a few days,
he heard of the case of the King, of the leprosy with which God had
afflicted him, and that the physicians and men of science had failed to
cure him. In consequence of this information, he passed the next night
in deep study; and when the morning came, and diffused its light, and
the sun saluted the Ornament of the Good, he attired himself in
the richest of his apparel, and presented himself before the King.
Having kissed the ground before him, and offered up a prayer for the
continuance of his power and happiness, and greeted him in the best
manner he was able, he informed him who he was, and said, O King, I have
heard of the disease which hath attacked thy person, and that many of
the physicians are unacquainted with the means of removing it; and I
will cure thee without giving thee to drink any potion, or anointing
thee with ointment. When King Yoonan heard his words, he wondered, and
said to him, How wilt thou do this? By Allah, if thou cure me, I will
enrich thee and thy children's children, and I will heap favours upon
thee, and whatever thou shalt desire shall be thine, and thou shalt be
my companion and my friend.--He then bestowed upon him a robe of
honour, and other presents, and said to him, Wilt thou cure me of
this disease without potion or ointment? He answered, Yes; I will cure
thee without any discomfort to thy person. And the King was extremely
astonished, and said, O Sage, at what time, and on what day, shall that
which thou hast proposed to me be done? Hasten it, O my Son.--He
answered, I hear and obey.



He then went out from the presence of the King, and hired a house, in
which he deposited his books, and medicines, and drugs. Having done
this, he selected certain of his medicines and drugs, and made a
goff-stick, with a hollow handle, into which he introduced them; after
which he made a ball for it, skilfully adapted; and on the following
day, after he had finished these, he went again to the King, and kissed
the ground before him, and directed him to repair to the horse-course,
and to play with the ball and goff-stick. The King, attended by his
Emeers and Chamberlains and Wezeers, went thither, and, as soon as he
arrived there, the sage Dooban presented himself before him, and handed
to him the goff-stick, saying, Take this goff-stick, and grasp it thus,
and ride along the horse-course, and strike the ball with it with all
thy force, until the palm of thy hand and thy whole body become moist
with perspiration, when the medicine will penetrate into thy hand, and
pervade thy whole body; and when thou hast done this, and the medicine
remains in thee, return to thy palace, and enter the bath, and
wash thyself, and sleep: then shalt thou find thyself cured: and peace
be on thee. So King Yoonan took the goff-stick from the sage, and
grasped it in his hand, and mounted his horse; and the ball was thrown
before him, and he urged his horse after it until he overtook it, when
he struck it with all his force; and when he had continued this exercise
as long as was necessary, and bathed and slept, he looked upon his skin,
and not a vestige of the leprosy remained: it was clear as white silver.
Upon this he rejoiced exceedingly; his heart was dilated, and he was
full of happiness.

On the following morning he entered the council-chamber, and sat upon
his throne; and the Chamberlains and great officers of his court came
before him. The sage Dooban also presented himself; and when the King
saw him, he rose to him in haste, and seated him by his side. Services
of food were then spread before them, and the sage ate with the King,
and remained as his guest all the day; and when the night
approached, the King gave him two thousand pieces of gold, besides
dresses of honour and other presents, and mounted him on his own horse,
and so the sage returned to his house. And the King was
astonished at his skill; saying, This man hath cured me by an external
process, without anointing me with ointment: by Allah, this is
consummate science; and it is incumbent on me to bestow favours and
honours upon him, and to make him my companion and familiar friend as
long as I live. He passed the night happy and joyful on account of his
recovery, and when he arose, he went forth again, and sat upon his
throne; the officers of his court standing before him, and the Emeers
and Wezeers sitting on his right hand and on his left; and he called for
the sage Dooban, who came, and kissed the ground before him; and the
King rose, and seated him by his side, and ate with him, and greeted him
with compliments: he bestowed upon him again a robe of honour and other
presents, and, after conversing with him till the approach of night,
gave orders that five other robes of honour should be given to him, and
a thousand pieces of gold; and the sage departed, and returned to his
house.



Again, when the next morning came, the King went as usual to his
council-chamber, and the Emeers and Wezeers and Chamberlains surrounded
him. Now there was, among his Wezeers, one of ill aspect, and of evil
star; sordid, avaricious, and of an envious and malicious
disposition; and when he saw that the King had made the sage Dooban his
friend, and bestowed upon him these favours, he envied him this
distinction, and meditated evil against him; agreeably with the adage
which saith, There is no one void of envy;--and another, which
saith, Tyranny lurketh in the soul: power manifesteth it, and weakness
concealeth it. So he approached the King, and kissed the ground before
him, and said, O King of the age, thou art he whose goodness extendeth
to all men, and I have an important piece of advice to give thee: if I
were to conceal it from thee, I should be a base-born wretch: therefore,
if thou order me to impart it, I will do so. The King, disturbed by
these words of the Wezeer, said, What is thy advice? He answered, O
glorious King, it hath been said, by the ancients, He who looketh not to
results, fortune will not attend him:--now I have seen the King in a way
that is not right; since he hath bestowed favours upon his enemy, and
upon him who desireth the downfall of his dominion: he hath treated him
with kindness, and honoured him with the highest honours, and admitted
him to the closest intimacy: I therefore fear, for the King, the
consequence of this conduct.--At this the King was troubled, and his
countenance changed; and he said, Who is he whom thou regardest as mine
enemy, and to whom I shew kindness? He replied, O King, if thou hast
been asleep, awake! I allude to the sage Dooban.--The King said, He is
my intimate companion, and the dearest of men in my estimation; for he
restored me by a thing that I merely held in my hand, and cured me of my
disease which the physicians were unable to remove, and there is not now
to be found one like to him in the whole world, from west to east.
Wherefore, then, dost thou utter these words against him? I will, from
this day, appoint him a regular salary and maintenance, and give him
every month a thousand pieces of gold; and if I gave him a share of my
kingdom it were but a small thing to do unto him. I do not think that
thou hast said this from any other motive than that of envy. If I did
what thou desirest, I should repent after it, as the man repented who
killed his parrot.