COMMENCING WITH PART OF THE NINTH NIGHT, AND ENDING WITH PART OF THE
EIGHTEENTH.

THE STORY OF THE PORTER AND THE LADIES OF BAGHDAD, AND OF THE THREE
ROYAL MENDICANTS, &c.

There was a man of the city of Baghdad, who was unmarried, and he was a
porter; and one day, as he sat in the market, reclining against his
crate, there accosted him a female wrapped in an
izar composed of
gold-embroidered silk, with a border of gold lace at each end, who
raised her face-veil, and displayed beneath it a pair of black eyes,
with lids bordered by long lashes, exhibiting a tender expression, and
features of perfect beauty; and she said, with a sweet voice, Bring thy
crate, and follow me.

The porter had scarcely heard her words when he took up his crate, and
he followed her until she stopped at the door of a house, and knocked;
whereupon there came down to her a Christian, and she gave him a piece
of gold, and received for it a quantity of olives, and two large vessels
of wine, which she placed in the crate, saying to the
porter, Take it up, and follow me. The porter exclaimed, This is,
indeed, a fortunate day!--and he took up the crate, and followed her.
She next stopped at the shop of a fruiterer, and bought of him Syrian
apples, and 'Othmanee quinces, and peaches of 'Oman, and
jasmine of Aleppo, and water-lilies of Damascus, and cucumbers of the
Nile, and Egyptian limes, and Sulanee citrons, and sweet-scented
myrtle, and sprigs of the enna-tree, and chamomile, and anemones, and
violets, and pomegranate flowers, and eglantine: all these she put into
the porter's crate, and said to him, Take it up. So he took it up, and
followed her until she stopped at the shop of a butcher, to whom she
said, Cut off ten pounds of meat;--and he cut it off for her, and she
wrapped it in a leaf of a banana-tree, and put it in the crate, and said
again, Take it up, O porter:--and he did so, and followed her. She next
stopped at the shop of a seller of dry fruits, and took some of every
kind of these, and desired the porter to take up his burden. Having
obeyed, he followed her until she stopped at the shop of a confectioner,
where she bought a dish, and filled it with sweets of every kind that he
had, which she put into the crate; whereupon the porter
ventured to say, If thou hadst informed me beforehand, I had brought
with me a mule to carry all these things. The lady smiled at his remark,
and next stopped at the shop of a perfumer, of whom she bought ten kinds
of scented waters; rose-water, and orange-flower-water, and
willow-flower-water, &c.; together with some sugar, and a
sprinkling-bottle of rose-water infused with musk, and some
frankincense, and aloes-wood, and ambergris, and musk, and wax candles;
and, placing all these in the crate, she said, Take up thy crate, and
follow me. He, therefore, took it up, and followed her until she came to
a handsome house, before which was a spacious court. It was a lofty
structure, with a door of two leaves, composed of ebony, overlaid with
plates of red gold.

The young lady stopped at this door, and knocked gently; whereupon both
its leaves were opened, and the porter, looking to see who opened it,
found it to be a damsel of tall stature, high-bosomed, fair and
beautiful, and of elegant form, with a forehead like the bright new
moon, eyes like those of gazelles, eyebrows like the new moon of
Ramaan, cheeks resembling anemones, and a mouth like the
seal of Suleyman: her countenance was like the full moon in
its splendour, and the forms of her bosom resembled two pomegranates of
equal size. When the porter beheld her, she captivated his reason, the
crate nearly fell from his head, and he exclaimed, Never in my life have
I seen a more fortunate day than this! The lady-portress, standing
within the door, said to the cateress and the porter, Ye are
welcome:--and they entered, and proceeded to a spacious
saloon, decorated with various colours, and beautifully
constructed, with carved wood-work, and fountains, and benches of
different kinds, and closets with curtains hanging before them; there
was also in it, at the upper end, a couch of alabaster
inlaid with large pearls and jewels, with a musquito-curtain of red
satin suspended over it, and within this was a young lady with eyes
possessing the enchantment of Babil, and a figure like the
letter Alif, with a face that put to shame the shining sun:
she was like one of the brilliant planets, or rather, one of the most
high-born of the maidens of Arabia. This third lady, rising
from the couch, advanced with a slow and elegant gait to the middle of
the saloon, where her sisters were standing, and said to them, Why stand
ye still? Lift down the burden from the head of this poor
porter:--whereupon the cateress placed herself before him, and the
portress behind him, and, the third lady assisting them, they lifted it
down from his head. They then took out the contents of the crate, and,
having put every thing in its place, gave to the porter two pieces of
gold, saying to him, Depart, O porter.

The porter, however, stood looking at the ladies, and admiring their
beauty and their agreeable dispositions; for he had never seen any more
handsome; and when he observed that they had not a man among them, and
gazed upon the wine, and fruits, and sweet-scented flowers, which were
there, he was full of astonishment, and hesitated to go out; upon which
one of the ladies said to him, Why dost thou not go? dost thou deem thy
hire too little? Then turning to one of her sisters, she said to her,
Give him another piece of gold.--By Allah, O my mistress, exclaimed the
porter, my hire is but two half-dirhems, and I thought not
what ye have given me too little; but my heart and mind were occupied
with reflections upon you and your state, ye being alone, with no man
among you, not one to amuse you with his company; for ye know that the
menareh standeth not firmly but on four walls: now ye have
not a fourth, and the pleasure of women is not complete without men: ye
are three only, and have need of a fourth, who should be a man, a
person of sense, discreet, acute, and a concealer of secrets. We are
maidens, they replied; and fear to impart our secret to him who will not
keep it; for we have read, in a certain history, this verse:--

  Guard thy secret from another: intrust it not: for he who intrusteth
    a secret hath lost it.



--By your existence, said the porter, I am a man of sense, and
trustworthy: I have read various books, and perused histories: I make
known what is fair, and conceal what is foul, and act in accordance with
the saying of the poet:--

  None keepeth a secret but a faithful person: with the best of mankind
    it remaineth concealed.
  A secret is with me as in a house with a lock, whose key is lost,
    and whose door is sealed.

When the ladies heard the verses which he quoted, and the words with
which he addressed them, they said to him, Thou knowest that we have
expended here a considerable sum of money: hast thou then wherewith to
requite us? We will not suffer thee to remain with us unless thou
contribute a sum of money; for thou desirest to sit with us, and to be
our cup-companion, and to gaze upon our beautiful faces.--If friendship
is without money, said the mistress of the house, it is not equivalent
to the weight of a grain:--and the portress added, If thou hast nothing,
depart with nothing:--but the cateress said, O sister, let us suffer
him; for, verily, he hath not been deficient in his services for us this
day: another had not been so patient with us: whatever, therefore, falls
to his share of the expense, I will defray for him.--At this the porter
rejoiced, and exclaimed, By Allah, I obtained my first and only pay this
day from none but thee:--and the other ladies said to him, Sit down:
thou art welcome.

The cateress then arose, and, having tightened her girdle, arranged the
bottles, and strained the wine, and prepared the table by the pool of
the fountain. She made ready all that they required, brought the wine,
and sat down with her sisters; the porter also sitting with them,
thinking he was in a dream. And when they had seated themselves, the
cateress took a jar of wine, and filled the first cup, and drank
it: she then filled another, and handed it to one of her
sisters; and in like manner she did to her other sister; after which she
filled again, and handed the cup to the porter, who, having taken it
from her hand, repeated this verse:--

  I will drink the wine, and enjoy health; for, verily, this beverage
    is a remedy for disease.



The wine continued to circulate among them, and the porter, taking his
part in the revels, dancing and singing with them, and enjoying
the fragrant odours, began to hug and kiss them, while one
slapped him, and another pulled him, and the third beat
him with sweet-scented flowers, till, at length, the wine made sport
with their reason; and they threw off all restraint, indulging
their merriment with as much freedom as if no man had been
present.

Thus they continued until the approach of night, when they
said to the porter, Depart, and shew us the breadth of thy
shoulders;--but he replied, Verily the departure of my soul
from my body were more easy to me than my departure from your company;
therefore suffer us to join the night to the day, and then each of us
shall return to his own, or her own, affairs. The cateress, also, again
interceded for him, saying, By my life I conjure you that ye suffer him
to pass the night with us, that we may laugh at his drolleries, for he
is a witty rogue. So they said to him, Thou shalt pass the night with us
on this condition, that thou submit to our authority, and ask not an
explanation of anything that thou shalt see. He replied, Good.--Rise
then, said they, and read what is inscribed upon the door. Accordingly,
he went to the door, and found the following inscription upon it in
letters of gold, Speak not of that which doth not concern thee, lest
thou hear that which will not please thee:--and he said, Bear witness to
my promise that I will not speak of that which doth not concern me.



The cateress then rose, and prepared for them a repast; and, after they
had eaten a little, they lighted the candles and burnt some aloes-wood.
This done, they sat down again to the table; and, while they were eating
and drinking, they heard a knocking at the door; whereupon, without
causing any interruption to their meal, one of them went to the door,
and, on her return, said, Our pleasure this night is now complete, for I
have found, at the door, three foreigners with shaven
chins, and each of them is blind of the left eye: it is an extraordinary
coincidence. They are strangers newly arrived, and each of
them has a ridiculous appearance: if they come in, therefore, we shall
be amused with laughing at them.--The lady ceased not with these words,
but continued to persuade her sisters until they consented, and said,
Let them enter; but make it a condition with them that they speak not of
that which doth not concern them, lest they hear that which will not
please them. Upon this she rejoiced, and, having gone again to the door,
brought in the three men blind of one eye and with shaven chins, and
they had thin and twisted mustaches. Being mendicants, they saluted and
drew back; but the ladies rose to them, and seated them; and when these
three men looked at the porter, they saw that he was intoxicated; and,
observing him narrowly, they thought that he was one of their own class,
and said, He is a mendicant like ourselves, and will amuse us by his
conversation:--but the porter, hearing what they said, arose, and rolled
his eyes, and exclaimed to them, Sit quiet, and abstain from impertinent
remarks. Have ye not read the inscription upon the door?--The ladies,
laughing, said to each other, Between the mendicants and the porter we
shall find matter for amusement. They then placed before the former some
food, and they ate, and then sat to drink. The portress handed to them
the wine, and, as the cup was circulating among them, the porter said to
them, Brothers, have ye any tale or strange anecdote wherewith to amuse
us? The mendicants, heated by the wine, asked for musical instruments;
and the portress brought them a tambourine of the manufacture of
El-Moil, with a lute of El-'Era, and a Persian harp;
whereupon they all arose; and one took the tambourine; another, the
lute; and the third, the harp: and they played upon these instruments,
the ladies accompanying them with loud songs; and while they were thus
diverting themselves, a person knocked at the door. The portress,
therefore, went to see who was there; and the cause of the knocking was
this.



The Khaleefeh Haroon Er-Rasheed had gone forth this night to see
and hear what news he could collect, accompanied by Jaafar his
Wezeer, and Mesroor his executioner. It was his custom to
disguise himself in the attire of a merchant; and this night, as he went
through the city, he happened to pass, with his attendants, by the house
of these ladies, and hearing the sounds of the musical instruments, he
said to Jaafar, I have a desire to enter this house, and to see who is
giving this concert.--They are a party who have become intoxicated,
replied Jaafar, and I fear that we may experience some ill usage from
them;--but the Khaleefeh said, We must enter, and I would that thou
devise some stratagem by which we may obtain admission to the inmates.
Jaafar therefore answered, I hear and obey:--and he advanced, and
knocked at the door; and when the portress came and opened the door, he
said to her, My mistress, we are merchants from Tabareeyeh, and
have been in Baghdad ten days; we have brought with us merchandise, and
taken lodgings in a Khan; and a merchant invited us to an
entertainment this night: accordingly, we went to his house, and he
placed food before us, and we ate, and sat awhile drinking together,
after which he gave us leave to depart; and going out in the
dark, and being strangers, we missed our way to the Khan: we trust,
therefore, in your generosity that you will admit us to pass the night
in your house; by doing which you will obtain a reward in heaven.--The
portress, looking at them, and observing that they were in the garb of
merchants, and that they bore an appearance of respectability, returned,
and consulted her two companions; and they said to her, Admit them:--so
she returned, and opened to them the door. They said to her, Shall we
enter with thy permission? She answered, Come in. The Khaleefeh,
therefore, entered, with Jaafar and Mesroor; and when the ladies saw
them, they rose to them, and served them, saying, Welcome are our
guests; but we have a condition to impose upon you, that ye speak not of
that which doth not concern you, lest ye hear that which will not please
you. They answered, Good:--and when they had sat down to drink, the
Khaleefeh looked at the three mendicants, and was surprised at observing
that each of them was blind of the left eye; and he gazed upon the
ladies, and was perplexed and amazed at their fairness and beauty. And
when the others proceeded to drink and converse, the ladies brought wine
to the Khaleefeh; but he said, I am a pilgrim;--and drew back
from them. Whereupon the portress spread before him an embroidered
cloth, and placed upon it a China bottle, into which she poured some
willow-flower-water, adding to it a lump of ice, and sweetening it with
sugar, while the Khaleefeh thanked her, and said within himself,
To-morrow I must reward her for this kind action.

The party continued their carousal, and, when the wine took effect upon
them, the mistress of the house arose, and waited upon them; and
afterwards, taking the hand of the cateress, said, Arise, O my sister,
that we may fulfil our debt. She replied, Good. The portress then rose,
and, after she had cleared the middle of the saloon, placed the
mendicants at the further end, beyond the doors; after which, the ladies
called to the porter, saying, How slight is thy friendship! thou art not
a stranger, but one of the family. So the porter arose, and girded
himself, and said, What would ye?--to which one of the ladies answered,
Stand where thou art:--and presently the cateress said to him, Assist
me:--and he saw two black bitches, with chains attached to their necks,
and drew them to the middle of the saloon; whereupon the mistress of the
house arose from her place, and tucked up her sleeve above her wrist,
and, taking a whip, said to the porter, Bring to me one of them.
Accordingly, he dragged one forward by the chain. The bitch whined, and
shook her head at the lady; but the latter fell to beating her upon the
head, notwithstanding her howling, until her arms were tired, when she
threw the whip from her hand, and pressed the bitch to her bosom, and
wiped away her tears, and kissed her head; after which she said to the
porter, Take her back, and bring the other;--and he brought her, and she
did to her as she had done to the first. At the sight of this, the mind
of the Khaleefeh was troubled, and his heart was contracted, and he
winked to Jaafar that he should ask her the reason; but he replied by a
sign, Speak not.



The mistress of the house then looked towards the portress, and said to
her, Arise to perform what thou hast to do. She replied, Good:--and the
mistress of the house seated herself upon a couch of alabaster, overlaid
with gold and silver, and said to the portress and the cateress, Now
perform your parts. The portress then seated herself upon a couch by
her; and the cateress, having entered a closet, brought out from it a
bag of satin with green fringes, and, placing herself before the lady of
the house, shook it, and took out from it a lute; and she tuned its
strings, and sang to it these verses:--

  Restore to my eyelids the sleep which hath been ravished;
    and inform me of my reason, whither it hath fled.
  I discovered, when I took up my abode with love, that slumber had
    become an enemy to my eyes.
  They said, We saw thee to be one of the upright; what, then, hath
    seduced thee? I answered, Seek the cause from his glance.
  Verily I excuse him for the shedding of my blood, admitting that
    I urged him to the deed by vexation.
  He cast his sun-like image upon the mirror of my mind, and its
    reflection kindled a flame in my vitals.

When the portress had heard this song, she exclaimed, Allah
approve thee!--and she rent her clothes, and fell upon the floor in a
swoon; and when her bosom was thus uncovered, the Khaleefeh saw upon her
the marks of beating, as if from mira'ahs and whips; at
which he was greatly surprised. The cateress immediately
arose, sprinkled water upon her face, and brought her another dress,
which she put on. The Khaleefeh then said to Jaafar, Seest thou not this
woman, and the marks of beating upon her? I cannot keep silence
respecting this affair, nor be at rest, until I know the truth of the
history of this damsel, and that of these two bitches. But Jaafar
replied, O our lord, they have made a covenant with us that we shall not
speak excepting of that which concerneth us, lest we hear that which
will not please us.--The cateress then took the lute again, and, placing
it against her bosom, touched the chords with the ends of her fingers,
and thus sang to it:--



  If of love we complain, what shall we say? Or consuming through desire,
    how can we escape?
  Or if we send a messenger to interpret for us, he cannot convey
    the lover's complaint.
  Or if we would be patient, short were our existence after the loss
    of those we love.
  Nought remaineth to us but grief and mourning, and tears streaming
    down our cheeks.
  O you who are absent from my sight, but constantly dwelling within
    my heart!
  Have you kept your faith to an impassioned lover, who, while time
    endureth, will never change?
  Or, in absence, have you forgotten that lover who, on your account,
    is wasting away?
  When the day of judgment shall bring us together, I will beg of
    our Lord a protractive trial.

On hearing these verses of the cateress, the portress again rent her
clothes, and cried out, and fell upon the floor in a swoon; and the
cateress, as before, put on her another dress, after she had sprinkled
some water upon her face.

The mendicants, when they witnessed this scene, said, Would that we had
never entered this house, but rather had passed the night upon the
mounds; for our night hath been rendered foul by an event
that breaketh the back! The Khaleefeh, looking towards them, then said,
Wherefore is it so with you? They answered, Our hearts are troubled by
this occurrence.--Are ye not, he asked, of this house?--No, they
answered; nor did we imagine that this house belonged to any but the man
who is sitting with you:--upon which the porter said, Verily, I have
never seen this place before this night; and I would that I had passed
the night upon the mounds rather than here. They then observed, one to
another, We are seven men, and they are but three women; we will,
therefore, ask them of their history; and if they answer us not
willingly they shall do it in spite of themselves:--and they all agreed
to this, excepting Jaafar, who said, This is not a right determination;
leave them to themselves, for we are their guests, and they made a
covenant with us which we should fulfil: there remaineth but little of
the night, and each of us shall soon go his way. Then, winking to the
Khaleefeh, he said, There remaineth but an hour; and to-morrow we will
bring them before thee, and thou shalt ask them their story. But the
Khaleefeh refused to do so, and said, I have not patience to wait so
long for their history.--Words followed words, and at last they said,
Who shall put the question to them?--and one answered, The porter.



The ladies then said to them, O people, of what are ye talking?--whereupon
the porter approached the mistress of the house, and said to her, O my
mistress, I ask thee, and conjure thee by Allah, to tell us the story of
the two bitches, and for what reason thou didst beat them, and then
didst weep, and kiss them, and that thou acquaint us with the cause of
thy sister's having been beaten with mira'ahs: that is our question,
and peace be on you.--Is this true that he saith of you? inquired the
lady, of the other men; and they all answered, Yes,--excepting Jaafar,
who was silent. When the lady heard their answer, she said, Verily, O
our guests, ye have wronged us excessively; for we made a covenant with
you beforehand, that he who should speak of that which concerned him not
should hear that which would not please him. Is it not enough that we
have admitted you into our house, and fed you with our provisions? But
it is not so much your fault as the fault of her who introduced you to
us.--She then tucked up her sleeve above her wrist, and struck the floor
three times, saying, Come ye quickly!--and immediately the door of a
closet opened, and there came forth from it seven black slaves, each
having in his hand a drawn sword. The lady said to them, Tie behind them
the hands of these men of many words, and bind each of them to
another:--and they did so, and said, O virtuous lady, dost thou permit
us to strike off their heads? She answered, Give them a short respite,
until I shall have inquired of them their histories, before ye behead
them.--By Allah, O my mistress, exclaimed the porter, kill me not for
the offence of others: for they have all transgressed and committed an
offence, excepting me. Verily our night had been pleasant if we had been
preserved from these mendicants, whose presence is enough to convert a
well-peopled city into a heap of ruins!--He then repeated this
couplet:--

  How good is it to pardon one able to resist! and how much more so,
    one who is helpless!
  For the sake of the friendship that subsisted between us, destroy
    not one for the crime of another!

On hearing these words of the porter, the lady laughed after her anger.
Then approaching the men, she said, Acquaint me with your histories, for
there remaineth of your lives no more than an hour. Were ye not persons
of honourable and high condition, or governors, I would
hasten your recompense.--The Khaleefeh said to Jaafar, Wo to thee, O
Jaafar! make known to her who we are; otherwise she will kill us.--It
were what we deserve, replied he.--Jesting, said the Khaleefeh, is not
befitting in a time for seriousness: each has its proper occasion.--The
lady then approached the mendicants, and said to them, Are ye brothers?
They answered, No, indeed; we are only poor foreigners. She
said then to one of them, Wast thou born blind of one eye?--No, verily,
he answered; but a wonderful event happened to me when my eye was
destroyed, and the story of it, if engraved on the understanding, would
serve as a lesson to him who would be admonished. She asked the second
and the third also; and they answered her as the first; adding, Each of
us is from a different country, and our history is wonderful and
extraordinary. The lady then looked towards them and said, Each of you
shall relate his story, and the cause of his coming to our abode, and
then stroke his head, and go his way.

The first who advanced was the porter, who said, O my mistress, I am a
porter; and this cateress loaded me, and brought me hither, and what
hath happened to me here in your company ye know. This is my story; and
peace be on you.--Stroke thy head, then, said she, and go:--but he
replied, By Allah, I will not go until I shall have heard the story of
my companions.--The first mendicant then advanced, and related as
follows:--


THE STORY OF THE FIRST ROYAL MENDICANT.

Know, O my mistress, that the cause of my having shaved my beard, and of
the loss of my eye was this:--My father was a King, and he had a brother
who was also a King, and who resided in another capital. It happened
that my mother gave birth to me on the same day on which the son of my
uncle was born; and years and days passed away until we attained to
manhood. Now, it was my custom, some years, to visit my uncle, and to
remain with him several months; and on one of these occasions my cousin
paid me great honour; he slaughtered sheep for me, and strained the wine
for me, and we sat down to drink; and when the wine had affected us, he
said to me, O son of my uncle, I have need of thine assistance in an
affair of interest to me, and I beg that thou wilt not oppose me in that
which I desire to do. I replied, I am altogether at thy service:--and he
made me swear to him by great oaths, and, rising immediately, absented
himself for a little while, and then returned, followed by a woman
decked with ornaments, and perfumed, and wearing a dress of
extraordinary value. He looked towards me, while the woman stood behind
him, and said, Take this woman, and go before me to the burial-ground
which is in such a place:--and he described it to me, and I knew it. He
then added, Enter the burial-ground, and there wait for me.

I could not oppose him, nor refuse to comply with his request, on
account of the oaths which I had sworn to him; so I took the woman, and
went with her to the burial-ground; and when we had sat there a short
time, my cousin came, bearing a basin of water, and a bag containing
some plaster, and a small adze. Going to a tomb in the midst of the
burial-ground, he took the adze, and disunited the stones, which he
placed on one side; he then dug up the earth with the adze, and
uncovered a flat stone, of the size of a small door, under which there
appeared a vaulted staircase. Having done this he made a sign to the
woman, and said to her, Do according to thy choice:--whereupon she
descended the stairs. He then looked towards me, and said, O son of my
uncle, complete thy kindness when I have descended into this place, by
replacing the trap-door and the earth above it as they were before:
then, this plaster which is in the bag, and this water which is in the
basin, do thou knead together, and plaster the stones of the tomb as
they were, so that no man may know it, and say, This hath been lately
opened, but its interior is old:--for, during the space of a whole year
I have been preparing this, and no one knew it but God: this is what I
would have thee do. He then said to me, May God never deprive thy
friends of thy presence, O son of my uncle!--and, having uttered these
words, he descended the stairs.



When he had disappeared from before my eyes, I replaced the trap-door,
and busied myself with doing as he had ordered me, until the tomb was
restored to the state in which it was at first; after which I returned
to the palace of my uncle, who was then absent on a hunting excursion. I
slept that night, and when the morning came, I reflected upon what had
occurred between me and my cousin, and repented of what I had done for
him, when repentance was of no avail. I then went out to the
burial-ground, and searched for the tomb; but could not discover it. I
ceased not in my search until the approach of night; and, not finding
the way to it, returned again to the palace; and I neither ate nor
drank: my heart was troubled respecting my cousin, since I knew not what
had become of him; and I fell into excessive grief. I passed the night
sorrowful until the morning, and went again to the burial-ground,
reflecting upon the action of my cousin, and repenting of my compliance
with his request; and I searched among all the tombs; but discovered not
that for which I looked. Thus I persevered in my search seven days
without success.

My trouble continued and increased until I was almost mad; and I found
no relief but in departing, and returning to my father; but on my
arrival at his capital, a party at the city-gate sprang upon me and
bound me. I was struck with the utmost astonishment, considering that I
was the son of the Sulan of the city, and that these were the servants
of my father and of myself: excessive fear of them overcame me, and I
said within myself, What hath happened to my father? I asked, of those
who had bound me, the cause of this conduct; but they returned me no
answer, till after a while, when one of them, who had been my servant,
said to me, Fortune hath betrayed thy father, the troops have been false
to him, and the Wezeer hath killed him; and we were lying in wait to
take thee.--They took me, and I was as one dead, by reason of this news
which I had heard respecting my father; and I stood before the Wezeer
who had killed my father.

Now, there was an old enmity subsisting between me and him; and the
cause of it was this:--I was fond of shooting with the cross-bow; and it
happened, one day, that as I was standing on the roof of my palace, a
bird alighted on the roof of the palace of the Wezeer, who was standing
there at the time, and I aimed at the bird; but the bullet missed it,
and struck the eye of the Wezeer, and knocked it out, in accordance with
the appointment of fate and destiny, as the poet hath said:--

  We trod the steps appointed for us: and the man whose steps are
    appointed must tread them.
  He whose death is decreed to take place in one land will not die
    in any land but that.

When I had thus put out the eye of the Wezeer, he could say nothing,
because my father was King of the city. This was the cause of the enmity
between him and me: and when I stood before him, with my hands bound
behind me, he gave the order to strike off my head. I said to him,
Wouldst thou kill me for no offence?--What offence, he exclaimed, could
be greater than this?--and he pointed to the place of the eye which was
put out. I did that, said I, unintentionally. He replied, If thou didst
it unintentionally, I will do the same to thee purposely:--and
immediately he said, Bring him forward to me:--and, when they had done
so, he thrust his finger into my left eye, and pulled it out. Thus I
became deprived of one eye, as ye see me. He then bound me firmly, and
placed me in a chest, and said to the executioner, Take this fellow, and
draw thy sword, and convey him without the city; then put him to death,
and let the wild beasts devour him.

Accordingly, he went forth with me from the city, and, having taken me
out from the chest, bound hand and foot, was about to bandage my eye,
and kill me; whereupon I wept, and exclaimed,--

  How many brothers have I taken as armour! and such they were;
    but to guard my enemies.
  I thought they would be as piercing arrows: and such they were;
    but to enter my heart!

The executioner, who had served my father in the same capacity, and to
whom I had shewn kindnesses, said, on hearing these verses, O my master,
what can I do, being a slave under command?--but presently he added,
Depart with thy life, and return not to this country, lest thou perish,
and cause me to perish with thee. The poet saith,--

  Flee with thy life if thou fearest oppression, and leave the house
    to tell its builder's fate.
  Thou wilt find, for the land that thou quittest, another: but no soul
    wilt thou find to replace thine own.

As soon as he had thus said, I kissed his hands, and believed not in my
safety until I had fled from his presence. The loss of my eye appeared
light to me when I considered my escape from death; and I journeyed to
my uncle's capital, and, presenting myself before him, informed him of
what had befallen my father, and of the manner in which I had lost my
eye: upon which he wept bitterly, and said, Thou hast added to my
trouble and my grief; for thy cousin hath been lost for some days, and I
know not what hath happened to him, nor can any one give me information
respecting him. Then he wept again, until he became insensible; and when
he recovered, he said, O my son, the loss of thine eye is better than
the loss of thy life.

Upon this I could no longer keep silence respecting his son, my cousin;
so I informed him of all that happened to him; and on hearing this news
he rejoiced exceedingly, and said, Shew me the tomb.--By Allah, O my
uncle, I replied, I know not where it is; for I went afterwards several
times to search for it, and could not recognise its place. We, however,
went together to the burial-ground, and, looking to the right and left,
I discovered it; and both I and my uncle rejoiced. I then entered the
tomb with him, and when we had removed the earth, and lifted up the
trap-door, we descended fifty steps, and, arriving at the bottom of the
stairs, there issued forth upon us a smoke which blinded our eyes;
whereupon my uncle pronounced those words which relieve from fear him
who uttereth them,--There is no strength nor power but in God, the High,
the Great!--After this, we proceeded, and found ourselves in a saloon,
filled with flour and grain, and various eatables; and we saw there a
curtain suspended over a couch, upon which my uncle looked, and found
there his son and the woman who had descended with him, lying side by
side, and converted into black charcoal, as if they had been thrown into
a pit of fire. And when he beheld this spectacle, he spat in his son's
face, and exclaimed, This is what thou deservest, O thou wretch! This is
the punishment of the present world, and there remaineth the punishment
of the other world, which will be more severe and lasting!--and he
struck him with his shoes. Astonished at this action, and grieved for my
cousin, seeing him and the damsel thus converted into charcoal, I said,
By Allah, O my uncle, moderate the trouble of thy heart, for my mind is
perplexed by that which hath happened to thy son, and by thinking how it
hath come to pass that he and the damsel are converted into black
charcoal. Dost thou not deem it enough for him to be in this state, that
thou beatest him with thy shoes?

O son of my brother, he replied, this my son was, from his early years,
inflamed with love for his foster-sister, and I used to
forbid him from entertaining this passion for her, and to say within
myself, They are now children, but when they grow older a base act will
be committed by them:--and, indeed, I heard that such had been the case,
but I believed it not. I, however, reprimanded him severely, and said to
him, Beware of so foul an action, which none before thee hath committed,
nor will any commit after thee: otherwise we shall suffer disgrace and
disparagement among the Kings until we die, and our history will spread
abroad with the caravans: have a care for thyself that such an action
proceed not from thee; for I should be incensed against thee, and kill
thee. I then separated him from her, and her from him: but the vile
woman loved him excessively; the Devil got possession of them both; and
when my son saw that I had separated him, he secretly made this place
beneath the earth, and, having conveyed hither the provisions which
thou seest, took advantage of my inadvertence when I had gone out to
hunt, and came hither: but the Truth (whose perfection be
extolled, and whose name be exalted!) was jealously vigilant over them,
and consumed them by fire; and the punishment of the world to come will
be more severe and lasting.--He then wept, and I wept with him; and he
said to me, Thou art my son in his stead.--I remained a while reflecting
upon the world and its vicissitudes, upon the murder of my father by the
Wezeer, and his usurping his throne, and the loss of my eye, and the
strange events which had happened to my cousin, and I wept again.

We then ascended, and, having replaced the trap-door and the earth above
it, and restored the tomb to its former state, returned to our abode;
but scarcely had we seated ourselves when we heard the sounds of drums
and trumpets, warriours galloped about, and the air was filled with dust
raised by the horses' hoofs. Our minds were perplexed, not knowing what
had happened, and the King, asking the news, was answered, The Wezeer of
thy brother hath slain him and his soldiers and guards, and come with
his army to assault the city unawares; and the inhabitants, being unable
to withstand, have submitted to him:--whereupon I said within myself, If
I fall into his hand, he will slay me.--Griefs overwhelmed me, and I
thought of the calamities which had befallen my father and my mother,
and knew not what to do; for if I appeared, the people of the city would
know me, and the troops of my father would hasten to kill and destroy
me. I knew no way of escape but to shave off my beard: so I
shaved it, and, having changed my clothes, departed from the city, and
came hither, to this abode of peace, in the hope that some person would
introduce me to the Prince of the Faithful, the Khaleefeh of the Lord of
all creatures, that I might relate to him my story, and all that had
befallen me. I arrived in this city this night; and as I stood
perplexed, not knowing whither to direct my steps, I saw this mendicant,
and saluted him, and said, I am a stranger. He replied, And I, too, am a
stranger:--and while we were thus addressing each other, our companion,
this third person, came up to us, and saluting us, said, I am a
stranger. We replied, And we, also, are strangers. So we walked on
together, and darkness overtook us, and destiny directed us unto your
abode.--This was the cause of the shaving of my beard, and of the loss
of my eye.

The lady then said to him, Stroke my head, and depart:--but he replied,
I will not depart until I have heard the stories of the others. And
they wondered at his tale; and the Khaleefeh said to Jaafar, Verily I
have never known the like of that which hath happened to this mendicant.



The second mendicant then advanced, and, having kissed the ground,
said,--


THE STORY OF THE SECOND ROYAL MENDICANT.

O my mistress, I was not born with only one eye; but my story is
wonderful, and, if written, would serve as a lesson to him who would be
admonished. I am a King, and son of a King: I read the uran according
to the seven readings, and perused various works under the
tuition of different learned professors of their subjects: I studied the
science of the stars, and the writings of the poets, and
made myself a proficient in all the sciences; so that I surpassed the
people of my age. My hand-writing was extolled among all
the scribes, my fame spread among all countries, and my history among
all Kings; and the King of India, hearing of me, requested my father to
allow me to visit him, sending him various gifts and curious presents,
such as were suitable to Kings. My father, therefore, prepared for me
six ships, and we proceeded by sea for the space of a whole month, after
which we came to land; and, having disembarked some horses which we had
with us in the ship, we loaded ten camels with presents, and commenced
our journey; but soon there appeared a cloud of dust, which rose and
spread until it filled the air before us, and, after a while, cleared a
little, and discovered to us, in the midst of it, sixty horseman like
fierce lions whom we perceived to be Arab highwaymen; and when they saw
us, that we were a small company with ten loads of presents for the King
of India, they galloped towards us, pointing their spears at us. We made
signs to them with our fingers, and said, We are ambassadors to the
honoured King of India; therefore do us no injury:--but they replied, We
are not in his territories, nor under his government. They slew certain
of the young men, and the rest fled. I also fled, after I had received a
severe wound; the Arabs being employed, without further regard to us, in
taking possession of the treasure and presents which we had with us.



I proceeded without knowing whither to direct my course, reduced from a
mighty to an abject state, and journeyed till I arrived at the summit of
a mountain, where I took shelter in a cavern until the next morning. I
then resumed my journey, and arrived at a flourishing city: the winter,
with its cold, had passed away, and the spring had come, with its
flowers; and I rejoiced at my arrival there, being wearied with my
journey, anxious and pallid. My condition being thus changed, I knew not
whither to bend my steps; and, turning to a tailor sitting in his shop,
I saluted him, and he returned my salutation, and welcomed me, and
wished me joy, asking me the reason of my having come thither. I
acquainted him, therefore, with what had befallen me from first to last,
and he was grieved for me, and said, O young man, reveal not thy case,
for I fear what the King of this city might do to thee, since he is the
greatest of thy father's enemies, and hath a debt of blood against him.
He then placed some food and drink before me, and we ate together, and I
conversed with him till night, when he lodged me in a place by his shop,
and brought me a bed and coverlet; and, after I had remained with him
three days, he said to me, Dost thou not know any trade by which to make
gain? I answered, I am acquainted with the law, a student
of sciences, a writer, and an arithmetician.--Thy occupation, he said,
is profitless in our country: there is no one in our city acquainted
with science or writing, but only with getting money. Verily, I replied,
I know nothing but what I have told thee.--Gird thyself, then, said he,
and take an axe and a rope, and cut firewood in the desert, and so
obtain thy subsistence until God dispel thy affliction; but acquaint no
one with thy history, else they will kill thee. He then bought for me an
axe and a rope, and sent me with a party of wood-cutters, giving them a
charge respecting me. Accordingly, I went forth with them, and, cut some
wood, and brought back a load upon my head, and sold it for half a
piece of gold, part of which I expended in food, laying by the
remainder.