Thus I continued for the space of a year, after which I went one day
into the desert, according to my custom, to cut firewood; and, finding
there a tract with abundance of wood, I entered it, and came to a tree,
around which I dug; and as I was removing the earth from its roots, the
axe struck against a ring of brass; and I cleared away the earth from
it, and found that it was affixed to a trap-door of wood, which I
immediately removed. Beneath it appeared a staircase, which I descended;
and at the bottom of this I entered a door, and beheld a palace,
strongly constructed, where I found a lady, like a pearl of high price,
whose aspect banished from the heart all anxiety and grief and
affliction. At the sight of her I prostrated myself in adoration of her
Creator for the fairness and beauty which He had displayed in her
person; and she, looking towards me, said, Art thou a man or a Jinnee? I
answered her, I am a man.--And who, she asked, hath brought thee to this
place, in which I have lived five and twenty years without ever seeing a
human being?--Her words sounded sweetly to me, and I answered her, O my
mistress, God hath brought me to thy abode, and I hope will put an end
to my anxiety and grief:--and I related to her my story from beginning
to end. She was grieved at my case, and wept, and said, I also will
acquaint thee with my story. Know that I am the daughter of the King of
the further parts of India, the lord of the Ebony Island. My father had
married me to the son of my uncle; but on the night of my bridal
festivities, an 'Efreet namad Jarjarees, the son of Rejmoos, the son of
Iblees, carried me off, and, soaring with me through the air, alighted
in this place, to which he conveyed all things necessary for me, such as
ornaments, and garments, and linen, and furniture, and food, and drink;
and once in every ten days he cometh to me, and spendeth a night
here; and he hath appointed with me, that, in case of my
wanting any thing by night or day, I should touch with my hand these
two lines which are inscribed upon the ubbeh, and as soon
as I remove my hand I see him before me. Four days have now passed since
he was last with me, and there remain, therefore, six days before he
will come again; wilt thou then remain with me five days, and depart one
day before his visit?--I answered, Yes; rejoicing at the proposal; and
she arose, and taking me by the hand, conducted me through an arched
door to a small and elegant bath, where I took off my clothes, while she
seated herself upon a mattress. After this, she seated me by her side,
and brought me some sherbet of sugar infused with musk, and
handed it to me to drink: she then placed some food before me, and after
we had eaten and conversed together, she said to me, Sleep, and rest
thyself; for thou art fatigued.

I slept, O my mistress, and forgot all that had befallen me; and when I
awoke, I found her rubbing my feet; upon which I called to
her, and we sat down again and conversed a while; and she said to me, By
Allah, I was straitened in my heart, living here alone, without any
person to talk with me, five and twenty years. Praise be to God who hath
sent thee to me.--I thanked her for her kind expressions; and love of
her took possession of my heart, and my anxiety and grief fled away. We
then sat down to drink together; and I remained by her side all the
night, delighted with her company, for I had never seen her like in my
whole life; and in the morning, when we were both full of joy, I said to
her, Shall I take thee up from this subterranean place, and release thee
from the Jinnee? But she laughed, and replied, Be content, and hold thy
peace; for, of every ten days, one day shall be for the 'Efreet, and
nine for thee. I persisted, however, being overcome with passion: and
said, I will this instant demolish this ubbeh upon which the
inscription is engraved, and let the 'Efreet come, that I may slay him:
for I am predestined to kill 'Efreets. She entreated me to refrain; but,
paying no attention to her words, I kicked the ubbeh with violence;
upon which she exclaimed, The 'Efreet hath arrived! Did I not caution
thee against this? Verily thou hast brought a calamity upon me; but save
thyself, and ascend by the way that thou camest.

In the excess of my fear I forgot my sandals and my axe, and when I had
ascended two steps, turning round to look for them, I saw that the
ground had opened, and there rose from it an 'Efreet of hideous aspect,
who said, Wherefore is this disturbance with which thou hast alarmed me,
and what misfortune hath befallen thee? She answered, No misfortune
hath happened to me, excepting that my heart was contracted, and I
desired to drink some wine to dilate it, and, rising to perform my
purpose, I fell against the ubbeh.--Thou liest, vile woman, he
exclaimed;--and, looking about the palace to the right and left, he saw
the sandals and axe; and said to her, These are the property of none but
a man. Who hath visited thee?--I have not seen them, she answered, until
this instant: probably they caught to thee.--This language, said he, is
absurd, and will have no effect upon me, thou shameless woman!--and, so
saying, he stripped her of her clothing, and tied her down, with her
arms and legs extended, to four stakes, and began to beat her, urging
her to confess what had happened.



For myself, being unable to endure her cries, I ascended the stairs,
overpowered by fear, and, arriving at the top, replaced the trap-door as
it was at first, and covered it over with earth. I repented bitterly of
what I had done, and reflecting upon the lady and her beauty, and how
this wretch was torturing her after she had lived with him five and
twenty years, and that he tortured her only on my account, and
reflecting also upon my father and his kingdom, and how I had been
reduced to the condition of a wood-cutter, I repeated this verse:--

  When fortune bringeth thee affliction, console thyself by remembering
    that one day thou must see prosperity, and another day, difficulty.



Returning to my companion, the tailor, I found him awaiting my return as
if he were placed in a pan upon burning coals. I past last night, said
he, with anxious heart on thy account, fearing for thee from some wild
beast or other calamity. Praise be to God for thy safe return.--I
thanked him for his tender concern for me, and entered my apartment; and
as I sat meditating upon that which had befallen me, and blaming myself
for having kicked the ubbeh, my friend the tailor came in to me, and
said, In the shop is a foreigner, who asks for thee, and he has thy axe
and sandals; he came with them to the wood-cutters, and
said to them, I went out at the time of the call of the Mueddin to
morning-prayer, and stumbled upon these, and know not to whom they
belong: can ye guide me to their owner?--The wood-cutters, therefore,
directed him to thee: he is sitting in my shop; so go out to him and
thank him, and take thy axe and thy sandals.--On hearing these words, my
countenance turned pale, and my whole state became changed; and while I
was in this condition, the floor of my chamber clove asunder, and there
rose from it the stranger, and lo, he was the 'Efreet; he had tortured
the lady with the utmost cruelty; but she would confess nothing: so he
took the axe and the sandals, and said to her, If I am Jarjarees, of the
descendants of Iblees, I will bring the owner of this axe and these
sandals. Accordingly, he came, with the pretence before mentioned, to
the wood-cutters, and, having entered my chamber, without granting me
any delay, seized me, and soared with me through the air: he then
descended, and dived into the earth, and brought me up into the palace
where I was before.

Here I beheld the lady stripped of her clothing, and with blood flowing
from her sides; and tears trickled from my eyes. The 'Efreet then took
hold of her, and said, Vile woman, this is thy lover:--whereupon she
looked at me, and replied, I know him not, nor have I ever seen him
until this instant. The 'Efreet said to her, With all this torture wilt
thou not confess? She answered, Never in my life have I seen him before,
and it is not lawful in the sight of God that I should speak falsely
against him.--Then, said he, if thou know him not, take
this sword and strike off his head. She took the sword, and came to me,
and stood over my head: but I made a sign to her with my eyebrow, while
tears ran down my cheeks. She replied in a similar manner, Thou art he
who hath done all this to me:--I made a sign to her, however, that this
was a time for pardon, conveying my meaning in the manner thus described
by the poet:--

  Our signal in love is the glance of our eyes; and every intelligent
    person understandeth the sign.
  Our eyebrows carry on an intercourse between us: we are silent;
    but love speaketh.

And when she understood me, she threw the sword from her hand, O my
mistress, and the 'Efreet handed it to me, saying, Strike off her head,
and I will liberate thee, and do thee no harm. I replied, Good:--and,
quickly approaching her, raised my hand; but she made a sign as though
she would say, I did no injury to thee:--whereupon my eyes poured with
tears, and, throwing down the sword, I said, O mighty 'Efreet, and
valiant hero, if a woman, deficient in sense and religion,
seeth it not lawful to strike off my head, how is it lawful for me to do
so to her, and especially when I have never seen her before in my life?
I will never do it, though I should drink the cup of death and
destruction.--There is affection between you, said the 'Efreet, and,
taking the sword, he struck off one of the hands of the lady; then, the
other; after this, her right foot; and then, her left foot: thus with
four blows he cut off her four extremities, while I looked on,
expecting my own death. She then made a sign to me with her eye; and the
'Efreet, observing her, exclaimed, Now thou hast been guilty of
incontinence with thine eye!--and, with a blow of his sword, struck off
her head; after which, he turned towards me, and said, O man, it is
allowed us by our law, if a wife be guilty of incontinence, to put her
to death. This woman I carried off on her wedding-night, when she was
twelve years of age, and she was acquainted with no man but me; and I
used to pass one night with her in the course of every ten days in the
garb of a foreigner; and when I discovered of a certainty that she had
been unfaithful to me, I killed her: but as for thee, I am not convinced
that thou hast wronged me with respect to her; yet I must not leave thee
unpunished: choose, therefore, what injury I shall do to thee.



Upon this, O my mistress, I rejoiced exceedingly, and, eager to obtain
his pardon, I said to him, What shall I choose from thy hands?--Choose,
he answered, into what form I shall change thee; either the form of a
dog, or that of an ass, or that of an ape. I replied, in my desire of
forgiveness, Verily, if thou wilt pardon me, God will pardon thee in
recompense for thy shewing mercy to a Muslim who hath done thee no
injury:--and I humbled myself in the most abject manner, and said to
him, Pardon me as the envied man did the envier.--And how was that? said
he. I answered as follows:--


THE STORY OF THE ENVIER AND THE ENVIED.

Know, O my master, that there was a certain man who had a neighbour that
envied him; and the more this person envied him, so much the more did
God increase the prosperity of the former. Thus it continued a long
time; but when the envied man found that his neighbour persisted in
troubling him, he removed to a place where there was a deserted well;
and there he built for himself an oratory, and occupied himself in the
worship of God. Numerous Faeers assembled around him, and
he acquired great esteem, people repairing to him from every quarter,
placing firm reliance upon his sanctity; and his fame reached the ears
of his envious neighbour, who mounted his horse, and went to visit him;
and when the envied man saw him, he saluted him, and payed him the
utmost civility. The envier then said to him, I have come hither to
inform thee of a matter in which thou wilt find advantage, and for which
I shall obtain a recompense in heaven. The envied man replied, May God
requite thee for me with every blessing. Then, said the envier, order
the Faeers to retire to their cells, for the information that I am
about to give thee I would have no one overhear. So he ordered them to
enter their cells; and the envier said to him, Arise, and let us walk
together, and converse; and they walked on until they came to the
deserted well before mentioned, when the envier pushed the envied man
into this well, without the knowledge of any one, and went his way,
imagining that he had killed him.

But this well was inhabited by Jinn, who received him unhurt, and seated
him upon a large stone; and when they had done this, one of them said to
the others, Do ye know this man? They answered, We know him not.--This,
said he, is the envied man who fled from him who envied him, and took up
his abode in this quarter, in the neighbouring oratory, and who
entertaineth us by his zikr and his readings; and when his
envier heard of him, he came hither to him, and, devising a stratagem
against him, threw him down here. His fame hath this night reached the
Sulan of this city, who hath purposed to visit him to-morrow, on
account of the affliction which hath befallen his daughter.--And what,
said they, hath happened to his daughter? He answered, Madness; for
Meymoon, the son of Demdem, hath become inflamed with love for her; and
her cure is the easiest of things. They asked him, What is it?--and he
answered, The black cat that is with him in the oratory hath at the end
of her tail a white spot, of the size of a piece of silver; and from
this white spot should be taken seven hairs, and with these the damsel
should be fumigated, and the Marid would depart from over her head, and
not return to her; so she would be instantly cured. And now it is our
duty to take him out.



When the morning came, the Faeers saw the Sheykh rising out of the
well; and he became magnified in their eyes. And when he entered the
oratory, he took from the white spot at the end of the cat's tail seven
hairs, and placed them in a portfolio by him; and at sunrise the King
came to him, and when the Sheykh saw him, he said to him, O King, thou
hast come to visit me in order that I may cure thy daughter. The King
replied. Yes, O virtuous Sheykh.--Then, said the Sheykh, send some
person to bring her hither; and I trust in God, whose name be exalted,
that she may be instantly cured. And when the King had brought his
daughter, the Sheykh beheld her bound, and, seating her, suspended a
curtain over her, and took out the hairs, and fumigated her with them;
whereupon the Marid cried out from over her head, and left her; and the
damsel immediately recovered her reason, and, veiling her face, said to
her father, What is this, and wherefore didst thou bring me to this
place? He answered her, Thou hast nothing to fear;--and rejoiced
greatly. He kissed the hand of the envied Sheykh, and said to the great
men of his court who were with him, What shall be the recompense of this
Sheykh for that which he hath done? They answered, His recompense should
be that thou marry him to her.--Ye have spoken truly, said
the King:--and he gave her in marriage to him, and thus the Sheykh became
a connection of the King; and after some days the King died, and he was
made King in his place.

And it happened one day that this envied King was riding with his
troops, and he saw his envier approaching; and when this man came before
him he seated him upon a horse with high distinction and honour, and,
taking him to his palace, gave him a thousand pieces of gold, and a
costly dress; after which he sent him back from the city, with
attendants to escort him to his house, and reproached him for
nothing.--Consider, then, O 'Efreet, the pardon of the envied to the
envier, and his kindness to him, notwithstanding the injuries he had
done him.


CONTINUATION OF THE STORY OF THE SECOND ROYAL MENDICANT.

The 'Efreet, when he had heard this story, replied, Lengthen not thy
words to me: as to my killing thee, fear it not; and as to my pardoning
thee, covet it not; but as to my enchanting thee, there is no escape
from it;--and, so saying, he clove the earth asunder, and soared with me
through the sky to such a height that I beheld the world beneath me as
though it were a bowl of water: then, alighting upon a mountain, he took
up a little dust, and, having muttered and pronounced certain words over
it, sprinkled me with it, saying, Quit this form, and take the form of
an ape!--whereupon I became like an ape of a hundred years of age.



When I saw myself changed into this ugly form, I wept for myself, but
determined to be patient under the tyranny of fortune, knowing it to be
constant to no one. I descended from the summit of the mountain, and,
after having journeyed for the space of a month, arrived at the
sea-shore; and, when I had stood there a short time, I saw a vessel in
the midst of the sea, with a favourable wind approaching the land; I
therefore hid myself behind a rock on the beach, and when the ship came
close up, I sprang into the midst of it. But as soon as the persons on
board saw me, one of them cried, Turn out this unlucky brute from the
ship:--another said, Let us kill him:--and a third exclaimed, I will
kill him with this sword. I, however, caught hold of the end of the
sword, and tears flowed from my eyes; at the sight of which the captain
took compassion on me, and said to the passengers, O merchants, this ape
hath sought my aid, and I give it him; he is under my protection; let no
one, therefore, oppose or trouble him. He then treated me with kindness,
and whatever he said to me I understood, and all that he required to be
done I performed as his servant.

We continued our voyage for fifty days with a fair wind, and cast anchor
under a large city containing a population which no one but God, whose
name be exalted, could reckon; and when we had moored our vessel, there
came to us some memlooks from the King of the city, who came on board
the ship, and complimented the merchants on their safe arrival, saying,
Our King greeteth you, rejoicing in your safety, and hath sent to you
this roll of paper, desiring that each of you shall write a line upon
it; for the King had a Wezeer who was an eminent caligraphist, and he is
dead, and the King hath sworn that he will not appoint any person to his
office who cannot write equally well. Though in the form of
an ape, I arose and snatched the paper from their hands; upon which,
fearing that I would tear it and throw it into the sea, they cried out
against me, and would have killed me; but I made signs to them that I
would write, and the captain said to them, Suffer him to write, and if
he scribble we will turn him away; but if he write well I will adopt him
as my son; for I have never seen a more intelligent ape. So I took the
pen, and demanded the ink, and wrote in an epistolary hand this
couplet:--

  Fame hath recorded the virtues of the noble; but no one hath been
    able to reckon thine.
  May God not deprive mankind of such a father; for thou art the parent
    of every excellence.

Then, in a more formal, large hand, I wrote the following verses:--

  There is no writer that shall not perish; but what his hand hath
    written endureth ever.
  Write, therefore, nothing but what will please thee when thou shalt
    see it on the day of resurrection.

Two other specimens I wrote, in two different and smaller hands, and
returned the paper to the memlooks, who took it back to the King; and
when he saw what was written upon it, the hand of no one pleased him
excepting mine; and he said to his attendants, Go to the author of this
hand-writing, put upon him this dress, and mount him upon a mule, and
conduct him, with the band of music before him, to my presence. On
hearing this order, they smiled; and the King was angry with them, and
said, How is it that I give you an order, and ye laugh at me? They
answered, O King, we laugh not at thy words, but because he who wrote
this is an ape, and not a son of Adam: he is with the captain of the
ship newly arrived.

The King was astonished at their words; he shook with delight, and said,
I would purchase this ape. He then sent some messengers to the ship,
with the mule and the dress of honour, saying to them, Ye must clothe
him with this dress, and mount him upon the mule, and bring him hither.
So they came to the ship, and, taking me from the captain, clad me with
the dress; and the people were astonished, and flocked to amuse
themselves with the sight of me. And when they brought me to the King,
and I beheld him, I kissed the ground before him three times, and he
ordered me to sit down: so I sat down upon my knees; and
the persons present were surprised at my polite manners, and especially
the King, who presently ordered his people to retire. They, therefore,
did so; none remaining but the King, and a eunuch, and a young memlook,
and myself. The King then commanded that a repast should be brought; and
they placed before him a service of viands, such as gratified the
appetite and delighted the eye; and the King made a sign to me that I
should eat; whereupon I arose, and, having kissed the ground before him
seven times, sat down to eat with him; and when the table was removed, I
washed my hands, and, taking the ink-case, and pen and paper, I wrote
these two verses:--

  Great is my appetite for thee, O Kunafeh! I cannot
    be happy nor endure without thee.
  Be thou every day and night my food; and may drops of honey not
    be wanting to moisten thee.

Having done this, I arose, and seated myself at a distance; and the
King, looking at what I had written, read it with astonishment, and
exclaimed, Can an ape possess such fluency and such skill in caligraphy?
This is, indeed, a wonder of wonders!--Afterwards, a chess-table was
brought to the King, and he said to me, Wilt thou play? By a motion of
my head I answered, Yes:--and I advanced, and arranged the
pieces. I played with him twice, and beat him; and the King
was perplexed, and said, Were this a man, he would surpass all the
people of his age.

He then said to his eunuch, Go to thy mistress, and say to her, Answer
the summons of the King:--that she may come and gratify her curiosity by
the sight of this wonderful ape. The eunuch, therefore, went, and
returned with his mistress, the King's daughter, who, as soon as she saw
me, veiled her face, and said, O my father, how is it that thou art
pleased to send for me, and suffer strange men to see me?--O my
daughter, answered the King, there is no one here but the young memlook,
and the eunuch who brought thee up, and this ape, with myself, thy
father: from whom, then, dost thou veil thy face?--This ape, said she,
is the son of a King, and the name of his father is Eymar:
he is enchanted, and it was the 'Efreet Jarjarees, a descendant of
Iblees, who transformed him, after having slain his own wife, the
daughter of King Anamoos. This, whom thou supposedst to be an ape, is a
learned and wise man.--The King was amazed at his daughter's words, and,
looking towards me, said, Is it true that she saith of thee? I answered,
by a motion of my head, Yes:--and wept. The King then said to his
daughter, By what means didst thou discover that he was enchanted?--O my
father, she answered, I had with me, in my younger years, an old woman
who was a cunning enchantress, and she taught me the art of enchantment:
I have committed its rules to memory, and know it thoroughly, being
acquainted with a hundred and seventy modes of performing it, by the
least of which I could transport the stones of thy city beyond Mount
af, and make its site to be an abyss of the sea, and convert its
inhabitants into fish in the midst of it.--I conjure thee, then, by the
name of Allah, said her father, to restore this young man, that I may
make him my Wezeer. Is it possible that thou possessedst this
excellence, and I knew it not? Restore him, that I may make him my
Wezeer, for he is a polite and intelligent youth.