NOTES TO CHAPTER FIFTH.

NOTE 1. As the story of the Humpback is one of the best in this
collection, and purely Arab, I have been glad to find, in the Calcutta
edition of the first two hundred nights, authority for deviating here
from my usual standard copy, by substituting "El-Barah" for a city of
China. The Breslau edition, in the opening of the story, lays the scene
at "El-Barah _and_ ajar." By the latter, I suppose Kashghar to be
meant.

NOTE 2. In my original, they are said to have gone out early in the
morning; but this is contradicted by the sequel.

NOTE 3. The appeal to Ezra's ass, which alludes to a tradition believed
by the Muslims, as it is mentioned in the ur-an, is omitted in the
Cairo edition. The story is this:--'Ozeyr, or Ezra, "riding on an ass by
the ruins of Jerusalem, after it had been destroyed by the Chaldeans,
doubted in his mind by what means God could raise the city and its
inhabitants again; whereupon God caused him to die, and he remained in
that condition a hundred years; at the end of which, God restored him to
life, and he found a basket of figs and a cruise of wine that he had
with him, not in the least spoiled or corrupted; but his ass was dead,
the bones only remaining; and these, while the Prophet looked on, were
raised and clothed with flesh, becoming an ass again, which, being
inspired with life, began immediately to bray."

NOTE 4. Most Arab cities abound with cats, which are much favoured by
the inhabitants. These animals are often seen leaping across from the
terrace of one house to that of another on the opposite side of a narrow
street; and often has my kitchen in Cairo been robbed by them. They are
said to contribute greatly to the spreading of the plague.

NOTE 5. Occurrences of this kind are said to have often happened in Arab
towns, where dogs, though esteemed unclean by the Muslims, are, like
cats, generally very numerous. Few of them have masters; but they
compose distinct tribes; those of each tribe confining themselves to a
particular quarter or district of the town, and suffering no strange dog
to intrude among them and share with them in the offal thrown out from
the butchers' shops and from private houses; or prowling about the
mounds of rubbish in the environs, and, like the vultures, feeding upon
the carcasses of camels, asses, and other beasts, thrown out by the
inhabitants. I was once told that the master of an English
merchant-vessel, having fallen asleep in a state of intoxication on the
shore of the harbour of Alexandria, at night, was devoured by dogs.

NOTE 6. The snatching of turbans by night is still a frequent practice
of Arab rogues, and one which is often very lucrative; many a turban
being composed of a costly Kashmeer shawl wound round a arboosh, which
latter alone is worth eight or nine shillings, or more, and some also
having money or other valuables secreted in them.

NOTE 7. Watchmen are generally employed to guard by night the soos, or
market-streets, and other districts, in Arab towns. Those in Cairo carry
a nebboot, or long staff, but no lantern. Their usual cries are of a
religious nature; as, "I extol the perfection of the Living King, who
sleepeth not nor dieth!" When they see a passenger approaching, they
call out to him, "Attest the unity of God!" or merely, "Attest the
unity!" and the reply is, "There is no deity but God!" It is supposed
that a person bound on any unlawful undertaking would not dare to utter
these words.

NOTE 8. At the period when this work was composed, the Christians were
distinguished from the Muslims by a black or blue turban, and this was
wound in a peculiar manner.

NOTE 9.--_On the Title and Office of_ Walee. "Walee" is the title given
to the chief magistrate of the police, and was so employed in the time
of El-Mareezee, instead of the older appellation of "aeb
esh-Shurah." The same officer was also called "Mutawellee." It was the
duty of this magistrate to perambulate the streets at night, attended by
a body of his officers, including an executioner; for he often inflicted
capital punishment on criminals immediately after their detection. He
was invested with a degree of despotic power, and often put to death
persons accused of capital crimes without the formalities required by
the law. It was also his duty to superintend the infliction of the
punishments of criminals legally condemned. An officer was employed to
perform the nightly rounds in El-Medeeneh in the reign of Aboo-Bekr; but
it appears that the first regular guard for this purpose was appointed
in the reign of 'Othman.

NOTE 10. The ardebb, thus commonly pronounced, but properly written
irdebb, varies in different places. In Cairo it is very nearly
equivalent to five English bushels.

NOTE 11. In the original, this building is called the Khan of
El-Jawalee; but it evidently should be----of El-Jawalee; and the error
is to be attributed to a copyist. The Khan of El-Jawalee is mentioned by
El-Mareezee, as being situate at a short distance within the
present gate called Bab en-Nar, and by the site of the older gate so
called; and as existing in his time, in the former half of the ninth
century of the Flight. [El-Mareezee also informs us, in his account of
the Medreseh el-Jawaleeyeh, that El-Jawalee's full name was
'Alam-ed-Deen Senjer, and that he was originally a memlook of one
Jawalee (whence his surname), an Emeer of El-Melik e-ahir Beybars. He
died in the year of the Flight 745.--ED.]

NOTE 12. Bab en-Nar (the Gate of Victory, or----of Aid) is the name
of the easternmost of the northern gates of Cairo. It was built in the
reign of the Khaleefeh El-Mustanir, in the year of the Flight 480 (A.
D. 1087-8).

NOTE 13. The words "besides my brokerage," I have inserted as necessary
to make the account correct.

NOTE 14. It has been shewn in a former note that the Arabs consider it
indecorous to eat with the left hand.

NOTE 15. As it is held impolite to shew the hands, unless unavoidably,
in the presence of a person of rank, the sleeve of the cloth coat, or
that of the silk vest which is worn beneath it, is made sufficiently
long to extend a little beyond the ends of the fingers; and so also, in
general, is the sleeve of the shirt worn by persons of the lower orders.

NOTE 16. This building is first called, in the Cairo edition, the Khan
of Suroor; and afterwards,----of Mesroor: the latter is the
appellation given to it in the edition of Breslau; and is the correct
name. The Khan of Mesroor is mentioned by El-Mareezee, as situate
at the southern extremity of Beyn el-areyn (respecting which see the
next note), adjacent to the site of the Great Palace of the Khaleefehs.
There were two Khans of this name near each other. El-Mareezee says,
that, in his earlier days, the greater of these, which appears to be
that here alluded to, was one of the finest and largest Khans in Cairo,
in a most flourishing state, the resort of the chief Syrian merchants,
and the depot of their goods; but that latterly it had declined, and
some portions of it were ruined.

NOTE 17. Beyn el-areyn (which signifies "Between the Two Palaces") is
the name still applied to that part of the principal street of Cairo
which intervenes between the sites of the two famous palaces of the
Khaleefehs.

NOTE 18. A eysareeyeh is a superior kind of soo, consisting of ranges
of shops facing each other. That which is here mentioned (called in the
Cairo edition, the eysereeyeh of Jirjis; in the edition of Breslau, the
eysareeyeh of Jarkash; and in the old English version, erroneously, the
Circassian bezestein) is the eysareeyeh of Jaharkas, which, as I learn
from El-Mareezee, was situate near the centre of what constituted
the old city, on the east of the principal street. It existed in his
time, and was built by the Emeer Fakhr-ed-Deen Jaharkas, in the year of
the Flight 502 (A.D. 1108-9). Ibn-Khallikan, as quoted by
El-Mareezee, says of it, "I have seen a number of merchants who have
traversed various countries, and who say, 'We have not seen in any
country its equal in beauty and greatness, and compactness of
construction.'" He explains also the orthography of the name of
"Jaharkas," and states that it is Persian (Chahar-kas), and signifies
"four persons."

NOTE 19. The Egyptian fowls are much smaller than those of our country,
and one is not too much for one man's breakfast. The eggs are usually
hatched in ovens.

NOTE 20. The appellation of "the Gardener" is here to be understood as a
mere surname derived from the occupation of some ancestor of the
merchant; it being a common custom of the Arabs to retain an appellation
of this kind, however humble.

NOTE 21. El-Mareezee mentions a "soo of the money-changers" as
near to the Khan of Mesroor; and it seems to be the place here alluded
to: the word "soo" being often omitted.

NOTE 22. The lady having offered up a prayer that the young merchant
might be her husband, I have taken the liberty of inserting here a
slight interpolation, which does not detract from the probability or
consistency of the story; but rather the contrary.

NOTE 23.--_On one of the Passages in this Work indicating a very late
Date._ The abbaneeyeh is the name now applied to a portion of a main
street, a little to the west of the lake called Birket el-Feel, in the
southern part of Cairo. It is evidently thus applied in the passage to
which this note relates; but El-Mareezee, writing in the former half of
the ninth century of the Flight, says, "In this our time, bordering
upon it  is a _garden_ called by the name of the
abbaneeyeh, who were a family of Darma the son of 'Amr the son of 'Owf
the son of Thaalebeh the son of Baal the son of 'Amr the son of El-Ghoth
the son of eiyi: so Darma was a minor family of  eiyi,
and the abbaneeyoon  were
a family of Darma; and the people have made a road between the garden of
the abbaneeyeh and the lake." He proceeds to say, that on the _east_ of
the Birket el-Feel there _were_ gardens; but that _houses_ and _streets_
had been built _there_.--Now, in the work before us, the tract which was
a _garden_ in the time of El-Mareezee is mentioned as occupied by
_houses_ and _streets_. Many years must have elapsed since that period
before such could have been the case; and surely at least a century
before the houses could have presented such an appearance as would lead
a writer to imagine them of "ancient times." It may be objected against
an argument drawn from this passage, that it is perhaps an interpolation
of a copyist; but it agrees with many evidences of a late date, and
occurs in at least one other copy (that from which the Breslau edition
is printed), with only this slight difference--that "abbaneeyeh," by
the erroneous addition of a point beneath the first letter, is converted
into "Jebbaneeyeh;" and it should be remarked that the latter copy
varies considerably in other points from that of Cairo. It would imply
that Cairo was almost as extensive a city at the time when this work was
composed or modernized as it is at present; and would account for its
being here called Mir, or Mar; a name which was retained by El-Fusa
at least as late as the commencement of the tenth century of the Flight,
and probably until the year 1517 of our era or a little later, as I have
remarked in a former note.

NOTE 24. "a'ah" is a term generally signifying "a lofty saloon;" but
also often applied to an elegant house.

NOTE 25. "Naeeb" signifies "a chief," "a leader," &c., and has various
applications. In the present instance, the office which it designates is
doubtful, but is evidently of high dignity, as Naeeb of the Shereefs,
the Chief, or Syndic, of the Descendants of the Prophet.

NOTE 26. Bab Zuweyleh (the Gate of Zuweyleh, or, more properly, of
Zaweeleh, which is the name of a tribe) is a gate that was built at the
same period as Bab en-Nar, before mentioned. It marked the southern
limit of Cairo; but is now in the heart of the metropolis. With two
round-fronted towers, each surmounted by a lofty and elegant mad'neh, or
menaret, pertaining to the adjoining great mosque of El-Mueiyad, it
presents a very noble appearance.

NOTE 27. "Imperial gypsum" is a name given to the best kind of plaster
used in Cairo. I have often admired the smoothness of its surface upon
the walls of chambers in some of the older houses in that city; but, I
need hardly say, never saw any that reflected like a mirror.

NOTE 28. In the Cairo edition, "with pearls and jewels at its corners."
The deficiency I have supplied from the edition of Breslau: but I may
here remark, that it would have been more proper to describe the snakes
as _gilt_.

NOTE 29.--_On the Crowns worn by Arab Ladies._ From Eastern drawings and
descriptions, it appears that the kind of crown here mentioned was
generally a circle of jewelled gold (the lower edge of which was
straight; and the upper, fancifully heightened to four or more points)
surrounding the lower part of a dome-shaped cap with a jewel or some
other ornament at the summit. This crown was worn by many Arab ladies of
high rank or great wealth, probably until about two centuries ago.
Another kind of crown is now more generally worn, called a "ur." This
is a round, convex ornament, generally about five inches in diameter,
composed of gold set with a profusion of diamonds, of open work,
representing roses, leaves, &c. It is sewed upon the top of the
arboosh; and is worn by most of the ladies of Cairo, at least in full
dress. An engraving of a crown of this description, and another of one
of a more common kind, may be seen in my work on the Modern Egyptians,
vol. ii. Appendix A.

NOTE 30. It is a common custom of the Arabs to give a present of money
tied up in a corner of an embroidered handkerchief.

NOTE 31. The mace is a weapon still used in the East; but not so
commonly as it was in former times. There was a petty governor in Upper
Egypt during my first visit to that country, who, in his daily rides,
indulged a frequent habit of striking persons with a weapon of this
kind, a tolerably-heavy steel mace; but he did it with a happy knack, so
as never, I believe, to inflict a dangerous wound, unless intentionally.
Maces, like other arms of steel, are often tastefully inlaid with
arabesque ornaments and inscriptions in gold.

NOTE 32.--_On the Punishment of Theft._ The Mohammadan law ordains that
a person who is adult and of sound mind, if he steals an article of the
value of a quarter of a deenar (or piece of gold) from a place to which
he has not ordinary or free access, shall lose his right hand; but this
punishment is not to be inflicted for stealing a free child, or anything
which, in the eye of the law, is of no pecuniary value; as wine, or a
musical instrument; and there are some other cases in which the thief is
not to be so punished. For the second offence, the left foot is to be
cut off; and for the third and subsequent offences, according to the
anafee code, the culprit is to be punished by a long imprisonment; or,
by the Shafe'ee law, for the third offence, he is to lose his left hand;
for the fourth, his right foot; and for further offences, he is to be
flogged or beaten. The punishment is the same for a woman as for a
man.--This law induced a freethinking Muslim to ask, "If the hand is
worth five hundred deenars, [this being the fine for depriving a man of
that member,] why should it be cut off for a quarter of a deenar?" He
was answered, "An honest hand is of great value; but not so is the hand
that hath stolen."--Amputation for theft is now seldom practised:
beating, or some other punishment, is usually inflicted in its stead for
the first, second, and third offence; and, frequently, death for the
fourth.

NOTE 33. Capital punishment in this case would be contrary to the law;
but it is often inflicted upon highway-robbers.

NOTE 34. The meaning is, that the doer is God. An allusion is here
conveyed to a verse (the 17th) in the Soorat el-Anfal (the eighth
chapter of the ur-an)--"Thou didst not cast [the gravel into their
eyes] when thou didst 

NOTE 35. The honour that is due to the human body requires that any
portion disunited from it be decently deposited in the earth.

NOTE 36. As a hair, for instance, is drawn from paste.

NOTE 37. These verses are founded on a tradition of the Prophet.

NOTE 38. _On_ Khatmehs, _or Recitations of the whole of the_ ur-an _at
Private Festivities._ The most approved and common mode of entertaining
guests at modern private festivities among the Arabs is by a Khatmeh,
which is the recitation of the whole of the ur-an. Three or more
persons of the inferior class of the professors of religion and law, who
are called faeehs (vulgarly, fiees), are usually hired for this
purpose. Schoolmasters, and students of the collegiate mosques who
devote themselves to religion and law, are the persons most commonly
thus employed. Their mode of recitation is a peculiar kind of
chanting, which, when well executed, I found very agreeable, at
least for an hour or so: but the guests seldom have to listen to the
chanting of the whole of the ur-an: the reciters usually accomplish the
greater portion of their task, in a somewhat hurried manner, before the
guests have assembled, each of them chanting, in turn, a certain
portion, as a thirtieth part of the whole (called a "juz"), or half of
one of these sections (a "ezb"), or, more commonly, a quarter (ruba).
Afterwards they chant more leisurely, and in a more musical manner; but
still by turns.--These recitations of the whole of the ur-an are
performed on various festive occasions, but are most usual after a
death; the merit of the performance being transferred to the soul of the
deceased.

NOTE 39. The mess termed "zirbajeh," by some called "zurbajeh," from the
Persian "zeerbaj," is a kind of spoon-meat. Some of its ingredients are
described in the sequel of the present story.

NOTE 40.--_On Atonements and other Services for the Dead._ As filial
piety is a general characteristic of the Arabs, and various services are
believed by them to atone for the minor sins of the deceased, and thus
to diminish his misery, or to increase his happiness, it is natural, and
not uncommon, for a son to act in the manner here related. Recitations
of the ur-an are performed for the dead, to whom the merit of these
works is transferred, and a sacrifice is often offered at the tomb after
the burial; the flesh of the victim being distributed to the poor. But a
more important service for the deceased is the payment of his debts; for
it is affirmed by the Prophet, that even martyrdom will not atone for a
debt unpaid.

NOTE 41. A money-changer is very frequently employed to examine the
money which a purchaser offers; and if it be old, to weigh it. The
money-changers are mostly Jews and Christians.

NOTE 42. Some mosques (as the Azhar, for instance, the principal mosque
of Cairo) remain open all night; and many houseless persons sleep in
them, upon the matting which covers the paved floor. Men are also often
seen, at other times, but not at the hours of prayer, lounging, eating,
or working, in the mosques; such practices not being deemed inconsistent
with the high respect which the Muslims pay to these buildings.

NOTE 43. The remainder of this paragraph, and the whole of the next two
paragraphs, being omitted in the edition of Cairo, I translate from the
Calcutta edition of the first two hundred nights, and the edition of
Breslau; but almost entirely from the former.

NOTE 44. The water of the well of Zemzem, in the temple of Mekkeh, is
believed to possess miraculous virtues, and is therefore brought away in
bottles or flasks by many of the pilgrims, to be used when occasion may
require as medicine, or to be sprinkled on grave-linen. A bottle of it
is a common and acceptable present from a pilgrim, and a guest is
sometimes treated with a sip of this holy water.

NOTE 45. A whip is sometimes used in the areem of a great man; and its
being attached to the waist of the damsel here mentioned marks her
authority. It is generally formed of a strip of hippopotamus' hide,
hammered into a round shape; and this kind is called a "kurbaj." I
believe it is seldom used in the areem with severity; but usually for
intimidation. [I once saw some of the ladies of Nazlee Khanim (thus
vulgarly pronounced for Nazloo Khanum) struck with a kurbaj, for too
curiously looking in at the window of an apartment in that lady's
palace, in which I and some friends happened to be, and which overlooked
the private garden. They were speedily driven away by two or three black
eunuchs, who appeared to use their heavy whips indiscriminately and
severely; their excuse for this conduct undoubtedly being, that these
ladies were guilty of a great impropriety in thus shewing themselves to
men; for when riding abroad, it is usual for passengers in the streets
to turn their faces to the wall on the approach of the women of a great
man's household. Moreover, the areem of Nazlee Khanim was well known to
be ruled with an iron hand, and its mistress herself to have acquired
the character of her brutal husband, Moammad Bey, the Defterdar, whose
cruelties are mentioned in the "Modern Egyptians."--ED.]

NOTE 46. It is a universal custom of the Arabs, on visiting the sick, to
say, "May our Lord restore thee!" or, "No evil befall thee!" &c.

NOTE 47. The first hospital built by a Muslim was that of Damascus,
founded by El-Weleed the son of 'Abd-El-Melik, in the eighty-eighth year
of the Flight (A. D. 706-7). The Arabs would deprive St. Ephrem Syrus of
the honour of having been the author of the first institution of this
kind; one of their historians ascribing it to an early Pharaoh, named
Menaiyoosh; another, to Hippocrates.

NOTE 48. The remainder of the paragraph is translated from the Calcutta
edition of the first two hundred nights.

Note 49. "The metropolis of the world," or literally, "the mother of the
world" ("umm ed-dunya"), is a title given to several cities, as well as
to Cairo, by their respective inhabitants. This passage, therefore, and
others of a similar kind, in which even _foreigners_ are made to rank
Egypt and Cairo as superior to every other country and city, strongly
favour the opinion that some of its tales were written, or altered, by
an Egyptian.

NOTE 50. A more ample eulogium upon Egypt and the Nile, but abounding
with such gross errors that I could not confidently offer a translation,
is found in the Breslau edition. It agrees better with the old
translation; which, however, in this place, presents considerable
unauthorized amplifications, and some misconceptions: "Birket el-abash"
(for instance), the name of a lake on the south of Cairo, being mistaken
for Ethiopia.

NOTE 51. For this monthly rent (or about a guinea of our money), a large
and handsome house may be hired at the present day in Cairo.

NOTE 52. After the amputation of the hand for theft, the stump is
usually plunged in boiling pitch or tar, or oil, to stanch the blood.

NOTE 53.--_On Retaliation and Fines for Wounds and Mutilations._
Retaliation for intentional wounds and mutilations is allowed by the
Mohammadan law, like as for murder; "eye for eye," &c.: but a fine
may be accepted instead, which the law allows also for unintentional
injuries. The fine for a member that is single (as the nose) is the
whole price of blood, as for homicide; namely a thousand deenars (about
500_l._) from him who possesses gold; or, from him who possesses
silver, twelve thousand dirhems (about 300_l._); for a member of which
there are two, and not more (as a hand), half the price of blood; for
one of which there are ten (a finger or toe), a tenth of the price of
blood: but the fine of a man for maiming or wounding a woman is half of
that for the same injury to a man; and that of a free person for
injuring a slave varies according to the value of the slave. The fine
for depriving a man of any of his five senses, or dangerously wounding
him, or grievously disfiguring him for life, is the whole price of
blood.

NOTE 54. See No. 20 of the notes to Chapter ii.--"The women of Egypt
have the character of being the most licentious in their feelings of all
females who lay any claim to be considered as members of a civilized
nation; and this character is freely bestowed upon them by their
_countrymen_, even in conversation with foreigners."--In the work
from which the above passage is quoted, I have expatiated upon this
subject more than I need do in the present case.

NOTE 55. The Arabs are generally of opinion that the innate dispositions
of a child are inherited more from the mother than from the father. They
believe that a daughter commonly resembles, in good or evil qualities,
her mother; and a son, his maternal uncle. Hence they often address a
man, "Ya eiyib el-khal!"--"O thou who hast a good maternal uncle!"

NOTE 56. 'Abd-Allah Ibn-'Abbas was one of the most learned of the
companions of his cousin Moammad, and one of the most celebrated of the
relaters of his sayings and actions. He has received the titles of
"Interpreter of the ur-an" and "Sulan of Commentators." He died in the
year of the Flight 68. His father, 'Abbas, the son of 'Abd-El-Mualib,
was paternal uncle of Moammad, and ancestor of the 'Abbasee Khaleefehs.

NOTE 57.--_On the Astrolabe._ The astrolabe is more commonly used by the
Arabs than any other instrument for astronomical observations. It is
generally between four and six inches in diameter. It consists of a
circular plate with a graduated rim, within which fit several thinner
plates, and of a limb, moving on a pivot in the centre, with two sights.
The plates are engraved with complicated diagrams, &c., for various
calculations. The instrument is held by a ring, or by a loop of cord
attached to the ring, during an observation; and thus its own weight
answers the same purpose as the plumb-line of the quadrant (which the
Arabs sometimes use in its stead); the position of the moveable limb
with the sights marking the required altitude.

NOTE 58. afar is the second mouth of the Mohammadan year.

NOTE 59. As different copies vary here as to the date, I have taken the
liberty of putting 263 instead of 763 or 653, in order to avoid a
glaring anachronism. It is probable, however, that the last of these is
the author's date, as it is found both in the old translation, and in
the Breslau edition. The date in the Cairo edition is 763.

NOTE 60. A degree is four minutes; it would have been more proper,
therefore, to have said, eight degrees and two minutes, than seven
degrees and six minutes.

NOTE 61. "E-amit" signifies "the Silent."

NOTE 62. This and the two following names, or rather, surnames, convey
the same meaning. Baboo, Heddar, and Baba (here, in my original,
erroneously written Yaya), signify "Chatterer." "El-Kooz el-Awanee"
(not to be mistaken for "---- ---- Aswanee," with a _soft_ s) seems to
imply that the person thus named was always like a mug, with open mouth,
and insensible as flint to rebuke. The two remaining names are different
in different copies: "Shaali" is perhaps put erroneously for some
other word, as "Shia," "Discord."

NOTE 63. ur-an, ch. iii. v. 128.

NOTE 64. The Arabs generally carry their young children in this manner,
seated astride upon the shoulder.

NOTE 65. This expression is borrowed from the ur-an, ch. xlviii. v. 10.
The meaning is, "there is no power of man, but God's power is superior
to it."

NOTE 66. The Prophet (Moammad) is always alluded to when this form of
benediction is used and the name of the person to whom it is applied is
not mentioned.

NOTE 67. "Nedd" is a perfume composed of ambergris, musk, and aloes
wood; or simply ambergris.

NOTE 68. Two khubehs are recited on the occasion of the congregational
Friday-prayers. It is the first of these which is here alluded to. See
the next note.

NOTE 69.--_On the Congregational Friday-prayers._ The Selam (or
Salutation) of Friday is a form of blessing on the Prophet and his
family and companions, which is chanted by the mueddins from the
mad'nehs (or towers) of the congregational mosques half an hour before
noon. The worshippers begin to assemble in the mosque as soon as they
hear it, and, ranging themselves in rows parallel to, and facing, that
side in which is the niche, that marks the direction of Mekkeh, each
performs, by himself, the prayers of two rek'ahs, which are
supererogatory, and then sits in his place while a reader recites part
or the whole of the 18th chapter of the ur-an. At the call of noon,
they all stand up, and each again performs, separately, the prayers of
two rek'ahs, ordained by the Prophet. A minister, standing at the foot
of the pulpit-stairs, then proposes to bless the Prophet: and
accordingly, a second Selam is chanted by one or more other ministers
stationed on an elevated platform. After this, the former minister, and
the latter after him, repeat the call of noon (which the mueddins have
before chanted from the mad'nehs); and the former enjoins silence. The
chief minister (Khaeeb, or Imam,) has already seated himself on the top
step or platform of the pulpit. He now rises, and recites a khubeh of
praise to God and exhortation to the congregation; and if in a country
or town acquired by arms from unbelievers, he holds a wooden sword,
resting its point on the ground. Each of the congregation next
offers up some private supplication; after which, the Khaeeb recites a
second khubeh, which is always the same, or nearly so; part, of a
similar nature to the first, but chiefly, prayer for the Prophet and his
family, &c., and for the general welfare of the Muslims. This finished,
the Khaeeb or Imam descends from the pulpit, and, stationed before the
niche, after a form of words differing slightly from the call to
prayer has been chanted by the ministers on the elevated platform before
mentioned, recites the divinely-ordained prayers of Friday (two
rek'ahs), while the people do the same silently, keeping time with him
exactly in the various postures. Thus are completed the Friday-prayers;
but some of the congregation remain, and perform the ordinary
divinely-ordained prayers of noon.

NOTE 70. So in the Cairo edition. El-Muntair bi-llah was the
great-grandson of Haroon Er-Rasheed, and acceded to the throne in the
year of the Flight 247 (A.D. 861). A slight anachronism, therefore, is
here presented, unless we suppose that the hero of the story told by
the Sulan's steward was an old man at the period of the misfortune of
the humpback. The reign of El-Muntair was somewhat less than six
months. The copy from which the old translation was made, and the
edition of Breslau, date the adventure of the barber, here related, more
than three centuries and a half later, in the reign of El-Mustair
bi-llah.

NOTE 71. The practice of spunging, or the intrusion of strangers at
entertainments, has long been very prevalent in Arab towns. An instance
has been given towards the close of Note 22 to Chapter iii.

NOTE 72. I have altered the order in which the brothers are described,
and omitted two particulars, to agree with the sequel.

NOTE 73. The next paragraph is translated from the Calcutta edition of
the first two hundred nights; being omitted in the Cairo edition. An
equal portion, later, is wanting in the old translation.

NOTE 74.--_On Augurations with respect to Marriage._ This passage
alludes to an astrological calculation made with the view of determining
by what sign of the zodiac the two persons are influenced who
contemplate becoming man and wife, and thence ascertaining whether they
will agree. This is often done in the present day by adding together the
numerical values of the letters composing his or her name and that of
the mother, and, if I remember right, subtracting from 12 the whole sum
if this is less than 12, or what remains after subtracting, or dividing
by, 12. Thus is obtained the number of the sign. The twelve signs,
commencing with Aries, correspond respectively with the elements of
fire, earth, air, water, fire, earth, and so on; and if the signs of the
two parties indicate the same element, it is inferred that they will
agree; but if they indicate different elements, the inference is, that
the one will be affected by the other in the same manner as the element
of the one is by that of the other: thus, if the element of the man is
fire, and that of the woman, water, he will be subject to her rule.

Among other calculations of the same kind is the following, which my
sheykh has mentioned in a marginal note on this passage, in the copy
from which I translate.--The numerical values of the letters composing
the name of each of the two parties are added together, and one of these
two sums is subtracted from the other: if the remainder is an uneven
number, the inference is unfavourable; but if even, the reverse.

In the present instance, the dupe, knowing that there are various modes
of divining whether he will be happy with his wife, is made to believe
that his fortune depends upon the mode, instead of the result, of the
calculation.

NOTE 75. Here, in my original, "Baba;" but this, as before mentioned,
was the name of the _third_ brother.

NOTE 76. "uffeh," signifying "a basket of palm-leaves," and "a dry
gourd," seems to be here equivalent to "empty-head."

NOTE 77. The blind in Egypt are notorious for their impudence.--It is
related that Moses, while bathing one day in the Nile, saw a blind man
pass by, and, being moved with pity, prayed that God would restore his
sight. His prayer was answered; but as soon as the eyes of the blind man
were opened, he seized the clothes of his benefactor, which were lying
on the bank, and protested that they were his own. Moses, therefore, now
prayed that the thief might be struck blind again; and God, answering
his prayer, said, O Moses, know that I am wiser than thou with respect
to my creatures.--This tradition was related to me in Cairo.

NOTE 78. It is generally thus that an injured Muslim calls others to his
aid.

NOTE 79. Like the natives of Egypt in the period of the Roman
domination, its modern inhabitants, and the Arabs of other
countries (though, I believe, in a less degree), are notorious for their
obstinacy in refusing to pay their taxes until they have been severely
beaten. They well know that, the more readily they pay, the more will be
exacted from them; and are often heard to boast of the number of stripes
which they have received before yielding their money. The same obstinacy
is generally displayed by an Arab accused of any offence; and often,
even by a witness: in either case the man fears that, should he tell at
once all he can, the judge will try whether the stick or the kurbaj
will elicit a further confession.

NOTE 80.--_On the general Corruptness of Muslim Judges._ Khir Bey
(whether he was a judge I do not know), conversing one day with his
friends on the difficulties experienced in the exercise of judicature,
one of the company remarked, "In my opinion, the greatest difficulty
that is met with is, when one of the parties is rich, and the other,
poor."--"In that case," replied Khir Bey, "I find none; for it is clear
that the rich will gain his cause, and the poor will lose: but the great
difficulty is, when the two parties are equally rich and powerful. If
thou, he continued, being a poor man, have a suit against one who is
rich and powerful, beware of applying to the aee; for he will not fail
to condemn thee: my advice is, that thou desist altogether from thy
suit, and rather throw thyself at the feet of thine adversary; for thou
wilt obtain more justice from him than from the aee."--For a
justification of the opinion here expressed, see my work on the Modern
Egyptians, vol. i. ch. iv.

NOTE 81.--_On good and evil Omens._ Of omens I have already treated, in
Note 15 to Chapter i.: but a few words on this subject must be here
added.--It is common to draw a lucky or unlucky omen from the first
object seen on going out in the morning; and according as that object is
pleasant or the contrary, the person says, "my morning is good," or
"---- bad." A one-eyed man is regarded as of evil omen; and especially
one who is blind of the _left_ eye. Many a person is related to have
suffered for having an unlucky countenance.

NOTE 82. The portion of this story comprised in the first paragraph
having been the subject of a specimen of the present publication,
translated from the Calcutta edition of the first two hundred nights,
and printed and distributed when I had not in my possession the copy of
the original which I have taken as my general standard, it is here given
nearly in the same words: I have only made a few slight additions and
alterations derived from a comparison of the two editions. Some of the
notes inserted in the specimen I omit in this place, as they relate to
matters already explained.--Hole remarks (in page 223), that this part
of the Barber's story of his Fifth Brother is derived "from an Indian
fable of the remotest antiquity ... found in the Heeto-pades of
Veeshnoo-Sarma," in which a Brahman "inadvertently breaks his pottery
ware ... with a walking-stick ... in the act of suppressing the
outrageous jealousy of four beautiful but turbulent wives."

NOTE 83. "El-Feshshar" signifies "the Foolish Talker," or "Vain
Boaster." I have substituted this name for "El-'Ashshar," the reading in
my original. In the Arabic characters, the latter differs from the
former in little more than the want of a point, and has no appropriate
meaning. It appears that, in most copies of the original, the barber's
Fifth Brother is surnamed "En-Neshshar," or "the Sawyer," perhaps in
allusion to his incessant loquacity: but this, also, in the Arabic
characters, very nearly resembles "El-Feshshar," which I doubt not to be
the right name.

NOTE 84. There is nothing very extravagant in this hope of the barber's
brother; for in the East, persons frequently rise from very low to very
high stations; and it is remarkable that, notwithstanding their usual
pride, they generally retain the appellation of the trade or craft which
they or their fathers pursued, however ignoble, before their elevation.
It is common for a great man to distinguish himself by adding to his
name the appellation of "the druggist or perfumer," or "the grocer,"
&c.; and he is not a whit the less respected on this account.

NOTE 85. The Eastern grandee rides not at the head or rear of his
attendants, but in the midst of them.

NOTE 86. Persons distinguished by rank or wealth or learning are saluted
by many of the shopkeepers and passengers as they pass through the
streets of Eastern cities, and often greeted with a short ejaculatory
prayer for the continuance of their life and happiness. When a very
great man rides through the streets, most of the shopkeepers rise to
him, and pay their respect to him by inclining the head, and touching
the lips and forehead or turban with the fingers of the right hand.

NOTE 87. See Note 12 to Chapter iii.

NOTE 88. He could scarcely shew his pride more strongly; for it is an
affront to reject a present.

NOTE 89. An Arab lady of high rank seldom makes use of her feet but to
move from one chamber to another; when she goes abroad, she always
rides: to stand for many minutes together is, therefore, fatiguing to
her.

NOTE 90. See the close of Note 39 to Chapter iv.

NOTE 91. This is said either to shew his vulgarity or that the weather
was sultry.

NOTE 92. "El-Meleeah" signifies "the Beautiful:" it is derived from
"mil" (salt, &c.).

NOTE 93. An occurrence of a similar nature, which happened a few years
ago in Cairo, was related to me by one of my friends there.--An old
woman frequented the tomb of a saint in that city, near the eastern gate
called the Bab el-Maroo, to which many women afflicted with disease or
barrenness often resorted to offer up prayers, believing their petitions
would be effectual through the saint's intercession; and she was in the
habit of enticing ladies from this tomb to the house of her husband,
which was near by, under pretence of his serving them with medicines or
with charms. The unsuspecting victim, being desired to go thither alone,
was conducted by the old woman to an upper room, at the end of which the
man was seated; and in walking over the matted floor to approach him,
suddenly fell through a trap-door into a place so deep that the fall
rendered her senseless. In this state, she was put to death; and as
ladies in Cairo always wear valuable ornaments and costly clothes, the
murderers were sure of obtaining considerable spoil.

NOTE 94. This money, we are to understand, was prepared for the purpose
of giving those presents which are customary from a guest at a
marriage-festivity; but the mention of a smaller sum would have been
more proper. It is given to the singing-women and tire-women who, in
great houses, parade the bride through the different apartments, and
display her in different rich suits of attire before the bridegroom.

NOTE 95.--_On the Handkerchief, and Signet, of Indemnity._ Sometimes,
the handkerchief, and sometimes, the signet, or seal-ring, is given as a
pledge of indemnity.--It was a frequent custom of many a chief of the
Memlooks of Egypt (there commonly called "the Ghuzz"), to bastinade men
in the court of his mansion (when he desired to make a show of strict
justice), in order that one of the women of the family, hearing the
cries, might drop a handkerchief from a window, and so the punishment
might soon cease, in respect for the areem, whose protection is often
appealed to by offenders.

NOTE 96. The title of "Sulan" is here, and afterwards, given to the
Khaleefeh; and it has been so employed by a celebrated historian,
El-Mareezee.

NOTE 97. So, apparently, in most copies; but in the Cairo edition, "of
the sons of the Kings." It is said to have been a custom of some of the
Barmekees (the family so renowned for their generosity) to keep open
house during the hours of meals, and to allow no one who applied at such
times for admission to be repulsed.

NOTE 98. "Sikbaj" is a dish composed of meat, wheat-flour, and vinegar.

NOTE 99. "aaif" is a name applied to various kinds of sweet pastry:
particularly to a kind of small pancakes, made of a thin paste of fine
flour and water, about three inches broad, and a sixth of an inch or
less in thickness, baked upon a copper tray over a fire, like kunafeh
(the composition of which is the same), and eaten with honey or sugar:
also to cakes composed of fine flour, treacle or honey, and sesame-oil.
The sirup mentioned in the same sentence is (as my sheykh states in a
marginal note) treacle thickened over the fire.--The proper singular of
aaif, namely, "aeefeh," is seldom used; one of these cakes being
generally called "fard aaif." Sometimes, it appears, they were
perfumed with musk.

NOTE 100. The "mithal" is the weight of a deenar, or a dirhem and a
half,--in Cairo, about 71-1/2 or 72 English grains.

NOTE 101. See above, Note 96.

NOTE 102. By "Arabs," we are here to understand Bedawees, or Arabs of
the Desert, who are termed, by the older writers, "Aarab," or
"Aarabees;" but in my original, as in other late works, "'Arab," which
was the _old_ appellation of the _townspeople_ and _villagers_.