COMMENCING WITH PART OF THE EIGHTEENTH NIGHT, AND ENDING WITH PART OF
THE TWENTY-FOURTH.

THE STORY OF THE THREE APPLES, &c.

One night, after the adventure above described, the Khaleefeh Haroon
Er-Rasheed said to Jaafar, his Wezeer, We will go down to-night into the
city, and inquire respecting the affairs of those who are at present in
authority, and him against whom any one shall complain we will displace.
Jaafar replied, I hear and obey:--and when the Khaleefeh had gone forth
with him and Mesroor, and they had passed through several of the
market-streets, they proceeded along a lane, and saw there an old man,
with a net and basket upon his head, and a staff in his hand, walking at
his leisure, and reciting these verses:--

  They say to me, Thou shinest among mankind, by thy knowledge,
    like the moonlight night:
  But I answer, Abstain from thus addressing me, since there is no
    knowledge without power:
  For if they would pawn me, and my knowledge with me, and all my papers
    and inkhorn too,
  For one day's food, they would never find the pledge accepted to
    the day of judgment.
  As for the poor, and his condition, and his whole life, how full of
    trouble!
  In the summer he fails to earn his food, and in winter he warms
    himself over the fire-pot.
  The dogs follow him wherever he goes, and any reviler, and he cannot
    repel him.
  If he states his case, and proves himself wronged, the judge will not
    admit his plea.
  Such, then, being the poor man's life, his fittest place is in
    the burial-ground.

The Khaleefeh, when he heard his recitation, said to Jaafar, Observe
this poor man, and consider these verses; for they indicate his
necessity. Then approaching the man, he said to him, O sheykh, what is
thine occupation?--O my master, answered the old man, I am a fisherman,
and have a family to maintain, and I went forth from my house at noon,
and have remained until now, but God hath allotted me nothing wherewith
to obtain food for my household; therefore I have hated myself, and
wished for death.--Wilt thou, said the Khaleefeh, return with us to the
river, and station thyself on the bank of the Tigris, and cast thy net
for my luck? If thou wilt do so I will purchase of thee whatever cometh
up for a hundred pieces of gold.--The fisherman rejoiced when he heard
these words, and said, On my head be your commands: I will return with
you.--So he went again to the river, and cast his net, and, having
waited till it sank, drew the cords, and dragged back the net, and there
came up in it a chest, locked and heavy. When the Khaleefeh saw it, he
felt its weight, and found it to be heavy; and he gave a hundred pieces
of gold to the fisherman, who went away, while Mesroor, assisted by
Jaafar, took up the chest, and conveyed it, in company with the
Khaleefeh, to the palace, where they lighted the candles, and placed the
chest before the Khaleefeh. Jaafar and Mesroor then broke it open, and
they found in it a basket of palm-leaves sewed up with red worsted; and
they cut the threads, and saw within it a piece of carpet, and, lifting
up this, they found beneath it an izar, and when they had
taken up the izar they discovered under it a damsel like molten silver,
killed, and cut in pieces.

When the Khaleefeh beheld this, tears ran down his cheeks, and, looking
towards Jaafar, he exclaimed, O dog of Wezeers, shall people be murdered
in my time, and be thrown into the river, and become burdens upon my
responsibility? By Allah, I must retaliate for this damsel upon him who
killed her, and put him to death!--Then said he to Jaafar, By the truth
of my descent from the Khaleefehs of the sons of El-'Abbas, if thou do
not bring to me him who killed this woman, that I may avenge her upon
him, I will crucify thee at the gate of my palace, together with forty
of thy kinsmen! And the Khaleefeh was enraged.--Grant me,
said Jaafar, a delay of three days.--I grant thee the delay, replied the
Khaleefeh. Jaafar then went forth from his presence, and took his route
through the city, sorrowful, and saying within himself, How shall I
discover him who killed this damsel, that I may take him before the
Khaleefeh? And if I take to him any other person, he will become a
weight upon my conscience. I know not what to do.--For three days he
remained in his house, and on the fourth day the Khaleefeh sent to
summon him, and, when he had presented himself before him, said to him,
Where is the murderer of the damsel?--O Prince of the Faithful, answered
Jaafar, am I acquainted with things hidden from the senses, that I
should know who is her murderer? The Khaleefeh, incensed at this answer,
gave orders to crucify him at the gate of his palace, and commanded a
crier to proclaim through the streets of Baghdad, Whosoever desireth to
amuse himself by seeing the crucifixion of Jaafar El-Barmekee, the
Wezeer of the Khaleefeh, and the crucifixion of his kinsmen, at the gate
of the Khaleefeh's palace, let him come forth and amuse himself.--So the
people came forth from every quarter to see the crucifixion of Jaafar
and his kinsmen; and they knew not the cause of this. The Khaleefeh then
gave orders to set up the crosses; and they did so, and placed the
Wezeer and his kinsmen beneath, to crucify them, and were awaiting the
Khaleefeh's permission, while the people wept for Jaafar and his
relatives.

But while they were thus waiting, a handsome and neatly-dressed young
man came forward quickly through the crowd, and, approaching the Wezeer,
said to him, Safety to thee from this predicament, O chief of Emeers,
and refuge of the poor! It was I who killed the woman whom ye found in
the chest: kill me therefore for her, and retaliate her death upon
me.--When Jaafar heard these words, he rejoiced for his own deliverance,
and grieved for the young man: but while he was speaking to him, lo, an
old sheykh pressed hastily through the crowd to him and the young man,
and, having saluted them, said, O Wezeer, believe not the words of this
young man, for no one killed the damsel but myself; therefore retaliate
her death upon me. The young man, however, said, O Wezeer, this is an
old man, imbecile through age; he knoweth not what he saith: it was I
who killed her; avenge her therefore upon me.--O my son, said the
sheykh, thou art young, and wilt find pleasure in the world; and I am
old, and satiated with the world: I will be a ransom for thee and for
the Wezeer and his kinsmen; and no one killed the damsel but myself: by
Allah, therefore, hasten to retaliate upon me.

On witnessing this scene, the Wezeer was astonished; and he took the
young man and the sheykh to the Khaleefeh, and said, O Prince of the
Faithful, the murderer of the damsel hath come.--Where is he? said the
Khaleefeh. This young man, answered Jaafar, saith, I am the
murderer;--and this sheykh accuseth him of falsehood, and saith, Nay,
but _I_ am the murderer.--The Khaleefeh, looking towards the sheykh and
the young man, said, Which of you killed this damsel? The young man
answered, No one killed her but myself:--and the sheykh said also, No
one killed her but myself. The Khaleefeh therefore said to Jaafar, Take
them both and crucify them.--If the murderer be one, replied Jaafar, to
kill the other would be unjust. The young man then said, By Him who
raised the heavens and spread out the earth, it was I who killed the
damsel:--and he gave an account of the manner of his killing her, and
described what the Khaleefeh had found. The Khaleefeh therefore was
convinced that the young man was he who had killed the damsel; and he
was astonished, and said, What was the cause of thy killing this damsel
unjustly, and of thy confessing the murder without being
beaten, and thy saying, Retaliate her death upon me? The
young man answered as follows:--



Know, O Prince of the Faithful, that this damsel was my wife, and the
daughter of my uncle: this sheykh was her father, and is my uncle. I
married her when she was a virgin, and God blessed me with three male
children by her; and she loved me and served me, and I saw in her no
evil. At the commencement of this month she was attacked by a severe
illness, and I brought to her the physicians, who attended her until her
health returned to her; and I desired them to send her to the bath; but
she said to me, I want something before I enter the bath, for I have a
longing for it.--What is it? said I. She answered, I have a longing for
an apple, to smell it, and take a bite from it. So I went out
immediately into the city, and searched for the apple, and would have
bought it had its price been a piece of gold: but I could not find one.
I passed the next night full of thought, and when the morning came I
quitted my house again and went about to all the gardens, one after
another; yet I found none in them. There met me, however, an old
gardener, of whom I inquired for the apple, and he said to me, O my son,
this is a rare thing, and not to be found here, nor anywhere except in
the garden of the Prince of the Faithful at El-Barah, and preserved
there for the Khaleefeh. I returned therefore to my wife, and my love
for her so constrained me that I prepared myself and journeyed fifteen
days, by night and day, in going and returning, and brought her three
apples which I purchased of the gardener at El-Barah for three pieces
of gold; and, going in, I handed them to her; but she was not pleased by
them, and left them by her side. She was then suffering from a violent
fever, and she continued ill during a period of ten days.

After this she recovered her health, and I went out and repaired to my
shop, and sat there to sell and buy; and while I was thus occupied, at
mid-day there passed by me a black slave, having in his hand an apple,
with which he was playing: so I said to him, Whence didst thou get this
apple, for I would procure one like it?--Upon which he laughed, and
answered, I got it from my sweetheart: I had been absent, and came, and
found her ill, and she had three apples; and she said to me, My
unsuspecting husband journeyed to El-Barah for them, and bought them
for three pieces of gold:--and I took this apple from her.--When I heard
the words of the slave, O Prince of the Faithful, the world became black
before my face, and I shut up my shop, and returned to my house,
deprived of my reason by excessive rage. I found not the third apple,
and said to her, Where is the apple? She answered, I know not whither it
is gone. I was convinced thus that the slave had spoken the truth, and I
arose, and took a knife, and throwing myself upon her bosom, plunged the
knife into her: I then cut off her head and limbs, and put them in the
basket in haste, and covered them with the izar, over which I laid a
piece of carpet: then I put the basket in the chest, and, having locked
this, conveyed it on my mule, and threw it with my own hands into the
Tigris.

And now, continued the young man, I conjure thee by Allah, O Prince of
the Faithful, to hasten my death in retaliation for her murder, as I
dread, otherwise, her appeal for vengeance upon me on the day of
resurrection: for when I had thrown her into the Tigris
without the knowledge of any one, I returned to my house, and found my
eldest boy crying, though he knew not what I had done to his mother: so
I said to him, What maketh thee cry?--and he answered, I took one of
the apples that my mother had, and went down with it into the street to
play with my brothers, and a tall black slave snatched it from me, and
said to me, Whence came this to thee? I answered him, My father made a
journey for it, and brought it from El-Barah, for the sake of my
mother; for she is sick: he bought three apples for three pieces of
gold:--but he took it from me and beat me, and went away with it; and I
am afraid that my mother may beat me on account of the apple.--When I
heard my son's story, I discovered that the slave had forged a lie
against the daughter of my uncle, and found that she had been killed
unjustly; and as I was weeping bitterly for what I had done, this
sheykh, my uncle and her father, came to me, and I informed him of the
event; and he seated himself by me, and wept. We wept until midnight,
and continued our mourning for her five days, ceasing not to the present
day to bewail her death. By the honour of thine ancestors, therefore,
hasten my death, to retaliate her murder upon me.

The Khaleefeh wondered at the young man's story, and said, By Allah, I
will not put to death any but the wicked slave; for the young man is
excusable. Then looking towards Jaafar, he said to him, Bring before me
this wicked slave who hath been the cause of the catastrophe; or, if
thou bring him not, thou shalt be put to death in his stead. So the
Wezeer departed weeping, and saying, Whence shall I bring him? Not every
time that the jar is struck doth it escape being broken! I have no
stratagem to employ in this affair: but He who delivered me in the first
case may deliver me in the second. By Allah, I will not go out from my
house for three days; and the Truth, whose perfection be extolled, will
do what He willeth!--So he remained in his house three days, and on the
fourth day he caused the aee to be brought, and made his testamentary
arrangements; and as he was bidding farewell to his children, and
weeping, lo, the messenger of the Khaleefeh came and said to him, The
Prince of the Faithful is in a most violent rage, and hath sent me to
thee; and he hath sworn that this day shall not pass until thou art put
to death if thou do not bring to him the slave.

On hearing this, Jaafar wept, and his children wept with him; and when
he had bidden them all farewell except his youngest daughter, he
approached her for the same purpose. He loved her more than all his
other children; and he pressed her to his bosom, and wept at the thought
of his separation from her; but, in doing this, he felt something round
in her pocket, and said to her, What is in thy pocket? She answered, O
my father, it is an apple; our slave Reyan brought it, and I
have had it four days; he would not give it me until he had received
from me two pieces of gold.--At this mention of the slave and the
apple, Jaafar rejoiced, and exclaimed, O ready Dispeller of
trouble!--and immediately he ordered that the slave should be
brought before him. He was therefore brought in, and he said to him,
Whence came this apple?--O my master, he answered, I went out five days
ago, and, entering one of the by-streets of the city, I saw some
children playing, and one of them had this apple: and I snatched it from
him, and beat him; and he cried, and said, That belongs to my mother,
and she is sick: she wanted my father to bring her an apple, and he made
a journey to El-Barah, and brought back for her three apples which he
bought for three pieces of gold; and I took this to play with it:--then
he cried again; but, paying no regard to him, I took it away and brought
it hither; and my little mistress bought it of me for two pieces of
gold.--When he heard this story, Jaafar was filled with wonder at
discovering that this distressing event, and the murder of the damsel,
had been occasioned by his slave; and he took the slave and went with
him to the Khaleefeh, who ordered that the story should be committed to
writing, and published.



Jaafar then said to him, Wonder not, O Prince of the Faithful, at his
tale, for it is not more extraordinary than the story of the Wezeer
Noor-ed-Deen, and Shems-ed-Deen, his brother.--What story, said the
Khaleefeh, can be more wonderful than this?--O Prince of the Faithful,
replied Jaafar, I will not relate it to thee unless on the condition
that thou exempt my slave from the punishment of death. The Khaleefeh
said, I give thee his blood:--and Jaafar, thereupon, commenced the
relation of the story as follows:--


THE STORY OF NOOR-ED-DEEN AND HIS SON, AND OF SHEMS-ED-DEEN AND HIS
DAUGHTER.

Know, O Prince of the Faithful, that there was, in Cairo, a
Sulan, just and beneficent, who had a wise and well-informed
Wezeer, possessing a knowledge of the affairs of the world, and of the
art of government. This minister was an aged man, and he had two sons,
like two moons: the name of the elder was Shems-ed-Deen, and that of the
younger, Noor-ed-Deen; and the latter was more distinguished than
the former by handsomeness and comeliness: there was no one in his day
more handsome, so that the fame of his charms spread through the
neighbouring regions, and some of the inhabitants of those parts
travelled to his country merely to obtain a sight of him. And it came to
pass that their father died, and the Sulan mourned for him, and,
turning his regards towards the two sons, took them into his favour,
invested them with robes of honour, and said to them, Ye two are
instated in your father's office:--at which they rejoiced, and kissed
the ground before him. They observed the ceremonies of mourning
for their father during a period of a whole month, and entered upon the
office of Wezeers, each of them discharging the duties of this station
for a week at a time; and whenever the Sulan had a desire to go forth
on a journey, he took one of them with him.

Now it happened, one night, that the Sulan purposed commencing a
journey on the following morning; and it was the turn of the elder
Wezeer to accompany him; and as the two brothers were conversing
together that night, the elder said, O my brother, it is my wish that we
should both marry on one night.--Do, O my brother, as thou desirest,
answered the younger; and I will comply with that which thou shalt say.
So they agreed to do this. The elder then said to his brother, If God so
decree that we obtain the betrothal of two maidens, and accomplish our
marriage on the same night, and they give birth to children on the same
day, and God will that thy wife have a son, and my wife have a daughter,
we will marry them to each other, for they will be cousins.--And what, O
my brother, said Noor-ed-Deen, wilt thou require of my son as the dowry
of thy daughter? He answered, I will require of thy son, as the dowry of
my daughter, three thousand pieces of gold, and three gardens, and three
farms; for if the young man make any other contract than this, it will
not be proper. But when Noor-ed-Deen heard this proposal, he exclaimed,
What is this dowry that thou imposest upon my son? Dost thou not know
that we are two brothers, and that we are both Wezeers, of one dignity?
It were incumbent on thee to offer thy daughter to my son as a free
gift, without any dowry; for thou knowest that the male is more
honourable than the female, and my child is a male, and by him shall our
memory be preserved: not by thy daughter.--What sayest thou of her?
asked his brother.--That our memory will not be preserved by her among
the nobles, answered Noor-ed-Deen. But thou desirest, added he, to act
with me according to the opinion of him who saith, If thou desire to
drive away a person who would buy, demand of him a high price.--I see
thee, replied Shems-ed-Deen, to have committed a fault, in making thy
son more honourable than my daughter: thou art doubtless deficient in
judgment, and destitute of good disposition, seeing that thou mentionest
the partnership in the office of Wezeer, when I admitted thee not to
share it with me excepting in my pity for thee, and that thou mightest
assist me: but talk as thou wilt: since thou hast said this, by Allah, I
will not marry my daughter to thy son, though thou offer me her weight
in gold.--On hearing these words of his brother, Noor-ed-Deen was
enraged, and said, I will not marry my son to thy daughter.--I will not
accept him as a husband for her, replied Shems-ed-Deen; and if I were
not purposing a journey, I would do to thee deeds that should serve as
warnings to others: however, when I return, God will do what He
willeth.--When Noor-ed-Deen heard this, he was full of anger, and became
unconscious of existence: but he concealed his feelings; and each of the
two brothers passed the night apart from the other; and in the morning
the Sulan set out on his journey, and, crossing over to the
island, proceeded towards the Pyramids, accompanied by the
Wezeer Shems-ed-Deen.

Noor-ed-Deen passed that night in a state of the utmost rage; and when
the morning came he arose, and, having performed the morning-prayers,
went to his closet and took out from it a pair of small saddle-bags,
which he filled with gold; and as he reflected upon the words of his
brother, and the contempt which he had shewn him, and the pride that he
had manifested towards him, he repeated these verses:--

  Travel. Thou wilt find a friend in the place of him thou leavest;
    and fatigue thyself; for by labour are the sweets of life
    obtained.
  To a man of intelligence and education there is no glory in a constant
    residence: therefore quit thy native place, and go abroad.
  I have observed that the stagnation of water corrupteth it;
    if it floweth, it becometh sweet; but otherwise, it doth not.
  If the full moon never set, the eye of the contemplative would not
    on every occasion pay regard to it:
  The lions, if they left not the forest, would capture no prey;
    and the arrow, if it quitted not the bow, would not strike the mark:
  The grains of gold upon their native bed are regarded as mere dust;
    and the aloes-wood, where it groweth, is a kind of firewood:
  If exported, it becometh an object of high demand; but if not,
    it attaineth no kind of distinction.

He then ordered one of his young men to saddle for him a dapple mule,
tall, and of quick pace; and he did so, placing upon her a saddle
adorned with gold, with stirrups of Indian steel, and housings of the
velvet of Ipahan; and she resembled a bride displayed before her
husband. He ordered him also to place upon her a carpet of silk, and a
prayer-carpet, and to put the saddle-bags beneath the
latter; and when this was done, he said to the young man and the slaves,
I have a desire to take a ride for my amusement outside the city,
towards the province of alyoob, and shall be absent three nights; and
let none of you follow me, for my heart is contracted.



Having thus said, he mounted his mule in haste, and, taking with him a
small supply of food, departed from the city, turning his face towards
the open country. The hour of noon overtook him not until he entered
the city of Bilbeys, where he alighted to repose himself and rest his
mule, and ate; after which he took from this place what he required for
himself, and some provender for his mule, and, having placed these
provisions upon her, went forth again into the plain, and before noon on
the second following day, he entered Jerusalem. Here he
alighted again, and rested himself and his beast, and ate: he then
placed his saddle-bags under his head, and spread his carpet, and slept,
still overcome by anger. He passed the night in this place; and in the
morning he remounted, and he continued to urge on his mule until he
arrived at Aleppo, where he alighted at a han, and remained
three days to give rest to himself and his mule, and to enjoy the air of
the place: which having done, he determined to prosecute his journey,
and mounted his mule, and went forth. He knew not whither to direct his
course; but travelled on until he arrived at the city of El-Barah; and
scarcely was he aware that the night had overtaken him, when he alighted
there at a Khan, where he took off the saddle-bags from the mule, and
spread the prayer-carpet, committing the mule, with her equipage, to the
care of the door-keeper, and ordering him to walk her about a little.



The door-keeper did so; and it happened that the Wezeer of El-Barah,
sitting at a window of his palace, saw the mule, and, observing her
costly equipage, thought that she must belong to some Wezeer or King;
and as he attentively regarded her he was surprised, and said to one of
his pages, Bring before me that door-keeper. So the page went and
brought him; and the door-keeper, approaching, kissed the ground before
him. The Wezeer, who was an aged person, then said to this man, Who is
the owner of this mule, and what is his appearance?--O my lord, answered
the door-keeper, her owner is a young man of elegant person, of the sons
of the merchants, and of a dignified and grave aspect. On hearing this,
the Wezeer arose, and, mounting his horse, went to the Khan,
and introduced himself to the young man, who, as soon as he saw him
approaching, rose to meet him, and embraced him. The Wezeer, after he
had alighted from his horse, saluted him and welcomed him, and, seating
him by his side, said to him, Whence, O my son, hast thou come; and for
what purpose?--O my lord, answered Noor-ed-Deen, I have come from the
city of Cairo: my father was Wezeer there; and he hath departed to
receive the mercy of God;--and he informed him of all that had happened
to him from first to last, adding, I have determined that I will not
return until I shall have seen all the cities and countries of the
world.--O my son, replied the Wezeer, obey not the suggestions of thy
mind, lest thou expose thyself to destruction; for the countries are
waste, and I fear on thy account the issues of fortune. So saying, he
ordered that the saddle-bags should be placed again on the mule,
together with the carpet of silk and the prayer-carpet, and took
Noor-ed-Deen with him to his house, where he lodged him in an elegant
apartment, and treated him with honour and kindness; and, conceiving a
strong affection for him, said to him, O my son, I have become an old
man, and I have no male child; God, however, hath blessed me with a
daughter who resembleth thee in comeliness, and I have rejected many
persons who have been her suitors: but now, love for thee hath entered
my heart; wilt thou then take my daughter as thy hand-maid to serve
thee, and be her husband? If thou consent to this, I will go up to the
Sulan of El-Barah, and will say to him, This is the son of my
brother;--and I will introduce thee to him, that I may make thee Wezeer
in my place, and I will remain in my house; for I am now
aged.--Noor-ed-Deen, on hearing this proposal of the Wezeer of
El-Barah, hung down his head, and then answered, I hear and obey.



The Wezeer rejoiced at his assent, and ordered his servants to prepare
for him a repast, and to decorate the great saloon which was
furnished for the reception of the chiefs of the Emeers. He then called
together his friends, and invited the great officers of the state, and
the merchants of El-Barah; and when they had come into his presence, he
said to them, I had a brother who was Wezeer in the land of Egypt, and
God blessed him with two sons; and me, as ye know, He hath blessed with
a daughter: now my brother enjoined me to marry my daughter to one of
his sons, and I consented to do so; and when she attained a fit age for
marriage, he sent to me one of his sons, who is this young man here
present. As soon, therefore, as he had come, I desired to perform the
marriage-contract between him and my daughter, and that he should
introduce himself to her here in my house.--Excellently hast thou done!
they replied. They then drank sherbet of sugar, and the pages sprinkled
rose-water upon them, and they departed: after which, the Wezeer ordered
his servants to conduct Noor-en-Deen to the bath, and gave him a suit of
his best clothes, and sent to him the napkins and cups and
perfuming-vessels, and everything else that he required. So when he came
out from the bath, he put on the suit of clothes, and appeared like the
full moon; and he mounted his mule, and, returning to the palace,
alighted and presented himself before the Wezeer, and kissed his hand:
and the Wezeer welcomed him, saying, Arise, and introduce thyself this
night to thy wife; and to-morrow I will go up with thee to the Sulan,
and I pray that God may bless thee with every kind of happiness.
Noor-ed-Deen therefore arose, and went to his wife, the daughter of the
Wezeer.--Thus did it happen to Noor-ed-Deen.

As to his brother, he continued a while journeying with the Sulan, and
when he returned, and found not his brother, he inquired of the servants
respecting him, and they answered, On the day of thy departure with the
Sulan, he mounted his mule, caparisoned as for a procession of state,
and said, I am going towards the province of alyoob, and shall be
absent a day or two days; for my heart is contracted; therefore let none
of you follow me:--and from the day on which he went forth, to the
present day, we have heard no tidings of him. Upon this the heart of
Shems-ed-Deen was troubled at the separation of his brother, and he
grieved excessively for his loss, saying within himself, The cause of
this is nothing else than my having spoken harshly to him in my
conversation on the night before my departure with the Sulan; and
probably his mind was disturbed, and he went on a journey: I must
therefore send after him. He then went up and related this event to the
Sulan, who wrote letters and sent them to his vicegerents in all the
provinces: but Noor-ed-Deen had traversed distant regions during the
absence of his brother with the Sulan: therefore the messengers, when
they had gone with the letters, returned without having obtained any
information respecting him. So Shems-ed-Deen despaired of his brother,
and said, I have enraged my brother by what I said to him concerning the
marriage of the children. Would that I had not done so! This was not
occasioned but by my want of sense and judgment!--And soon after this,
he demanded in marriage the daughter of one of the merchants of Cairo,
and performed the marriage-contract between himself and her, and
introduced himself to her: and it happened that the night when this
event took place was the same night on which Noor-ed-Deen introduced
himself to his wife, the daughter of the Wezeer of El-Barah: this being
in accordance with the will of God, whose name be exalted, that He might
execute his decree upon his creatures.

The event was as they both had said: for it came to pass that the two
wives conceived by them: the wife of Shems-ed-Deen, the Wezeer, of
Egypt, gave birth to a daughter, than whom there was not seen, in that
country, one more beautiful; and the wife of Noor-ed-Deen gave birth to
a son, one more beautiful than whom was not seen in his time: as the
poet hath said:--

  If beauty came to be compared with him, it would hang down its head
    in shame;
  Or if it were said, O beauty, hast thou seen the like?--it would
    answer, The equal of this I have not.

So they named him asan; and on the seventh day after his
birth, they made entertainments and spread repasts such as were fit for
the sons of Kings after which the Wezeer of El-Barah took
with him Noor-ed-Deen, and went up with him to the Sulan; and when he
came into his presence he kissed the ground before him; and
Noor-ed-Deen, being eloquent in tongue, and firm of heart, and comely in
person and in actions, recited these words of the poet:--

  This is he whose justice extendeth to all men, and who hath overrun
    and subdued every region.
  Be thankful for his benefits; for they are not mere benefits;
    but they are strings of jewels on the necks of his people;
  And kiss his fingers; for they are not mere fingers;
    but they are the keys of the supplies of Providence.

The Sulan treated them both with honour, and, having thanked
Noor-ed-Deen for his address, said to his Wezeer, Who is this young man?
The Wezeer therefore related to him his story from beginning to end, and
added, This is the son of my brother.--How is it, said the Sulan, that
he is the son of thy brother, and we have not before heard of him? The
Wezeer answered, O our lord the Sulan, I had a brother who was Wezeer
in the land of Egypt, and he died, leaving two sons: the elder succeeded
to his father's office, as Wezeer, and this his younger son came to me;
and I swore that I would not marry my daughter to any but him: so, when
he came, I married him to her. He is a young man, and I am now aged; my
hearing is impaired, and my judgment faileth: it is my wish, therefore,
that our lord the Sulan would instate him in my office, seeing that he
is the son of my brother and the husband of my daughter, and a person
worthy of the dignity of Wezeer; for he is endowed with knowledge and
judgment.--The Sulan, upon this, looked towards him, and, being pleased
with him, approved of the advice of the Wezeer that he should promote
him to that office; so he bestowed it upon him, and ordered that a
magnificent dress of honour should be given to him, and one of the best
of the mules upon which he was himself accustomed to ride, allotting him
also supplies and salaries; and Noor-ed-Deen kissed the hand of the
Sulan, and descended with his father-in-law to their house, both in
high delight, and saying, Verily the birth of this child is fortunate.
On the following day Noor-ed-Deen went again to the King, and kissed the
ground, and the Sulan ordered him to sit in the place of the Wezeer:
so he sat, and occupied himself with the affairs of his office, and
examined the cases of the people, and their suits, according to the
custom of Wezeers: and the Sulan, observing him, was surprised at his
conduct, and the acuteness of his understanding, and his good judgment.
He attentively considered his qualities, and loved him, and advanced him
in his favour: and when the court was dissolved, Noor-ed-Deen returned
to his house, and related what had passed to his father-in-law, who was
rejoiced at hearing it.



The old Wezeer ceased not to superintend the rearing of the child, who
was named asan, for many days, while Noor-ed-Deen was constantly
occupied with the affairs of his office, so that he left not the Sulan
by day nor by night; and the King increased his salaries and supplies
until his circumstances became ample: he had ships which made voyages
under his orders with merchandise and other things, and he founded
numerous estates, and made water-wheels and gardens. Thus
did he until his son asan was four years of age, when the old Wezeer,
the father of his wife, died; and he conveyed his corpse with great
pomp, and decently deposited it in the earth. He then turned his
thoughts towards the education of his son; and when the child had gained
strength, he brought him a tutor to teach him in his own house, charging
him to instruct him and educate him well; and the tutor did so, and
taught him various useful sciences, after he had passed some years in
learning the ur-an. asan meanwhile increased in loveliness and beauty,
and elegance of person. The tutor continued to educate him in his
father's palace; and from the time that he arrived at adolescence he
went not out of the Wezeer's palace, until his father took him one day,
and, having clad him in one of the richest of his dresses, mounted him
on one of his best mules, and conducted him to the Sulan, and
introduced him. When the King beheld asan Bedr-ed-Deen, the
son of the Wezeer Noor-ed-Deen, he was astonished at his beauty; and the
people, when he passed by them for the first time, going up with his
father to the King, were amazed at his surpassing beauty and loveliness,
and elegance of person. The Sulan, as soon as he saw him, loved him,
and bestowed marks of favour upon him, and said to his father, O Wezeer,
thou must bring him with thee every day. The Wezeer answered, I hear and
obey;--and returned with his son to his abode; and he continued every
day to go up with him to the Sulan until the youth attained the age of
fifteen years.

His father, the Wezeer Noor-ed-Deen, then fell sick, and called him into
his presence, and said to him, O my son, know that this world is a
perishable abode, and the world to come is an everlasting abode. I wish
to give thee some precepts, and do thou understand what I am about to
say to thee, and incline thy heart to it.--And he began to counsel him
respecting the proper mode of conducting himself in society, and the due
management of his affairs; and when he had done so, he reflected upon
his brother and his native place and country, and wept at the thought of
his separation from those he loved; his tears flowing: and he said, O my
son, hear my words. I have a brother in Cairo, and I quitted
him and departed against his will.--He then took a piece of
paper, and wrote upon it all that had happened to him from
first to last, together with the date of his marriage and introduction
to the daughter of the Wezeer, and the date of his arrival at El-Barah
and his interview with its Wezeer; and, having added some strict
admonition, he said to his son, Keep this charge, for the paper on which
it is written containeth an account of thine origin and thy rank and
lineage; and if any evil accident befall thee, repair to Cairo, and
inquire for thine uncle, and salute him, and inform him that I died in a
strange land, ardently desiring that I could see him. Therefore asan
Bedr-ed-Deen took the paper, and, having folded it, and wrapped it in a
piece of waxed cloth, sewed it between the lining and the
outer cloth of his cap, and wept for his father, that he
should be parted from him in his youth.

Noor-ed-Deen then said to his son, I charge thee that thou
be not familiar with any one; for in retirement is security. Divinely
gifted was the poet who said,--

  There is none in thy time whose friendship thou shouldst covet;
    nor any intimate who, when fortune is treacherous, will be
    faithful.
  Live then apart, and rely upon no man: I have given thee,
    in these words, good advice, and sufficient.

Accustom thyself to taciturnity: occupy thyself with thine own affairs,
and use not many words: for the poet saith,--

  Taciturnity is an ornament, and in silence is security: therefore,
    when thou speakest, be not loquacious:
  For if thou repent once of thy silence, thou wilt assuredly repent
    many times of thy speech.

Beware of drinking wine; for it is the source of every kind of mischief.
The poet saith on this subject,--

  I have abandoned wine and those who drink it; and have become
    the friend of such as condemn it.
  Wine leadeth astray from the path of rectitude, and openeth
    the doors to evil.

Hate no man, and oppress none; for oppression is base. The poet saith,--

  Oppress not if thou hast the power to do so; for oppression will
    eventually bring thee repentance:
  Thine eye will sleep while the oppressed, wakeful, will call for
    vengeance upon thee; and the eye of God sleepeth not.

Despise thy wealth, but not thyself: yet bestow not wealth save upon him
who deserveth it. If thou keep it, it will keep thee; but if thou
squander it, it will ruin thee; and then wilt thou need the assistance
of the least of mankind. It hath been said by the poet,--

  When my wealth faileth, no friend assisteth me; but when it aboundeth,
    all men are my friends.
  How many enemies for the sake of wealth have consorted with me!
    And my companion, in the time of want, hath abandoned me!

In this manner he continued to admonish his son asan Bedr-ed-Deen until
his spirit departed. The house became a scene of mourning, and the
Sulan and all the Emeers grieved for him; and they buried him. They
continued their mourning during a period of two months, and the son of
Noor-ed-Deen rode not out nor went to the court nor presented himself
before the Sulan; and the King instated one of the Chamberlains in his
place, and appointed a new Wezeer in the place of his father, and
ordered this Wezeer to put seals upon all the houses of Noor-ed-Deen,
and upon his wealth and all his buildings and other possessions.
So the new Wezeer went with the Chamberlains to the house of the Wezeer
Noor-ed-Deen, to seal its door and to arrest his son asan Bedr-ed-Deen,
and bring him before the Sulan, that he might do to him what his
judgment required. But there was among the troops one of the memlooks of
the deceased Wezeer Noor-ed-Deen; and he could not endure that the son
of his master should be thus treated: he therefore repaired to asan
Bedr-ed-Deen, whom he found with downcast head and mourning heart, on
account of the death of his father, and acquainted him with what had
passed. asan asked him, Will the execution of the order be delayed long
enough for me to enter my house, and take somewhat of my worldly
possessions by which to obtain support during my exile? But the memlook
answered, Save thyself:--and when asan heard these words, he covered
his head with the skirt of his robe, and, going forth on foot, fled of
the city: and he heard the people saying, The Sulan hath sent the new
Wezeer to the house of the deceased Wezeer, to seal his wealth and other
possessions, and to arrest his son asan Bedr-ed-Deen, and bring him
before him that he may put him to death:--and the people were mourning
for him on account of his beauty and loveliness. So when he heard what
they said, he took a course that he had not intended, and, not knowing
whither to go, walked on until destiny urged him to the tomb of his
father.



Entering the burial-ground, he bent his way among the tombs until he
seated himself at that of his father, where he removed his skirt from
over his head. And as he was sitting there, a Jew of El-Barah
approached, and said to him, Wherefore, O my master, do I see thee thus
changed? He answered, I was just now sleeping, and I beheld my father
reproaching me for having failed to visit his tomb: wherefore I rose in
alarm, fearing that the day would pass without my visiting it, and so
the occurrence would distress me. The Jew then said to him, O my master,
thy father despatched some vessels with merchandise, and some of them
have returned; and it is my wish to purchase of thee the cargo of every
vessel that hath arrived for a thousand pieces of gold;--and so saying,
he took out a purse filled with gold, and counted out from it a thousand
pieces, which he paid to asan the son of the Wezeer, and said to him,
Write me a paper, and seal it. So asan took a paper, and wrote upon it,
The writer of this paper, asan Bedr-ed-Deen, the son of the Wezeer
Noor-ed-Deen, hath sold to the Jew such a one the whole cargo of every
one of his father's vessels that hath returned from her voyage, for a
thousand pieces of gold, and hath received the price in advance. And
after he had taken a copy of it, the Jew went away with the
paper; and asan wept, reflecting upon his former state of dignity and
favour. At length the night closed in upon him, and sleep overtook him,
and he remained asleep at his father's tomb until the moon rose when his
head rolled from the tomb, and he lay and slept on his back, his face
shining in the moonlight.



Now the burial-ground was inhabited by believing Jinn; and a Jinneeyeh,
coming forth, saw the face of asan as he lay asleep, and when she
beheld him, was surprised at his beauty and loveliness, and exclaimed,
Extolled be Allah's perfection! This youth is like none but the virgins
of paradise!--She then soared into the air, to perform her accustomed
circuits, and saw an 'Efreet on his flight. She saluted him, and he
returned her salutation; and she said to him, Whence comest thou? He
answered from Cairo:--and she said to him, Wilt thou go with me to
behold the beauty of the youth who is sleeping in the burial-ground? He
replied, Yes. So they went together; and when they had descended into
the burial-ground, she said to him, Hast thou seen in the course of thy
life a person like this?--And the 'Efreet looked upon him, and
exclaimed, Extolled be the perfection of Him unto whom none is to be
compared! But, O my sister, he added, if thou desire, I will relate to
thee what I have seen.--Tell me, she replied: so he said, I have seen a
person resembling this youth in the land of Egypt; and that person is
the daughter of the Wezeer. The King had heard of her, and demanded her
of her father, the Wezeer Shems-ed-Deen, in marriage; but he answered
him, O our lord the Sulan, accept my excuse, and pity my grief; for
thou knowest that my brother Noor-ed-Deen departed from us, and we know
not where he is; and that he shared with me the office of Wezeer; and
the cause of his departure was this, that I was sitting conversing with
him on the subject of marriage, and he was angry with me, and in anger
went away:--and he related to the King all that had passed between them;
adding, This was the cause of his indignation, and I have been under an
oath that I will not marry my daughter to any but the son of my brother
from the day that her mother gave birth to her; and that was about
fifteen years ago: and lately I heard that my brother had married the
daughter of the Wezeer of El-Barah, and obtained a son by her; and I
will not marry my daughter to any but him, in honour of my brother.
After I had heard this, I recorded the date of my marriage, and of my
wife's conception, and of the birth of this daughter: she is intended
for the son of her uncle; and of other maidens there are plenty.--But
when the Sulan heard these words of the Wezeer, he was violently
enraged, and said, How is it that such a one as myself demandeth in
marriage a daughter from one like thee, and thou withholdest her from
him, and excusest thyself by an absurd pretext? By my head, I will not
marry her but to one of less consideration than myself, in scorn of thy
pride!--And the King had a humpbacked groom, with a hump before and a
hump behind; and he ordered him to be brought, and affianced him to the
daughter of the Wezeer, commanding that he should introduce himself to
her this night, and be conducted in pompous procession. I left him in
the midst of the memlooks of the Sulan, who were surrounding him with
lighted candles in their hands, laughing at him and mocking him, at the
door of the bath, while the daughter of the Wezeer was sitting weeping
in the midst of the dye-women
She resembles more than any other person this youth. They have
prohibited her father from going to her; and I have never seen, O my
sister, a more ugly wretch than this humpback: but as to the maiden, she
is more beautiful than this youth.

To this story of the 'Efreet, the Jinneeyeh answered, Thou liest; for
this youth is the most beautiful of the people of his age. But the
'Efreet replied, By Allah, O my sister, the maiden is more beautiful
than he: however, none but he is suited to her; for they resemble each
other, and probably are brother and sister, or cousins; and how will she
be thrown away upon this humpback! She therefore said to him, O my
brother, let us place ourselves beneath him and lift him up and take him
to the maiden of whom thou speakest, and see which of the two is more
beautiful. The 'Efreet answered, I hear and obey: this proposal is
right, and there can be no better determination than this which thou
hast chosen; therefore I will carry him. So he lifted him up, and soared
into the sky, and the Jinneeyeh flew by his side until he descended with
him in the city of Cairo, where he placed him upon a maabah,
and roused him from his sleep.

When, therefore, he awoke, and found that he was not at his father's
tomb in the land of El-Barah, he looked to the right and left, and
perceived that he was in a city that was not El-Barah, and would have
cried out, but the 'Efreet winked to him, and, lighting for him a
candle, said to him, Know that I have brought thee hither, and I desire
to do thee a service for the sake of God: take, therefore, this candle,
and go with it to yonder bath, and mix with the people there, and
proceed with them until thou arrivest at the saloon of the bride; then
go before, and enter the saloon, and fear no one; and when thou hast
entered, station thyself on the right of the humpbacked bridegroom; and
whenever the tire-women and singing-women and dye-women come to thee,
put thy hand into thy pocket: thou wilt find it full of gold, and do
thou take it by the handful and throw it to them; and imagine not that
thou wilt put thy hand in and not find it filled with gold: give
therefore to every one who cometh to thee by the handful, and fear
nothing; but rely upon Him who created thee; for this will not be
through thine own strength or power, but through the strength of God,
and his power.



On hearing these words of the 'Efreet, asan Bedr-ed-Deen said, What is
this event, and what manner of kindness is this? And he went with his
candle to the bath, where he found the humpback mounted on his horse;
and he joined himself to the party, in the same garb in which he had
arrived, and with the same comely appearance; being attired with a
arboosh interwoven
with gold. He proceeded with the pompous train, and every time that the
singing-women stopped for the people to give them money, he put his hand
into his pocket, and found it filled with gold, and took it by the
handful and threw it into the tambourine, for the
singing-women and tire-women, filling the tambourine with pieces of
gold: and the singing-women were amazed, and the people wondered at his
beauty and loveliness. Thus he continued to do until they arrived at the
house of the Wezeer, when the chamberlains drove back the people, and
prevented their entrance; but the singing-women and tire-women said, By
Allah, we will not enter unless this youth enter with us, for he hath
overwhelmed us with his favours, and the bride shall not be displayed
unless he be present:--and upon this they entered with him into the
saloon of the festivity, and seated him, in spite of the humpbacked
bridegroom. All the ladies of the Emeers and Wezeers and Chamberlains
were ranged in two rows, each lady holding a large lighted candle, and
having her head-veil drawn across the lower part of her face: thus they
stood in two rows, to the right and the left, from the foot of the couch
of the bride to the upper end of the leewan that adjoined the chamber
from which the bride was to come forth. And when the ladies beheld asan
Bedr-ed-Deen and his beauty and loveliness, his face shining like the
crescent of the moon, the hearts of all of them inclined to him, and the
female singers said to all the women who were present, Know that this
charming youth hath given us nothing but red gold; therefore fail not to
serve him properly, and obey him in whatever he shall say. The women
crowded round him to gaze at his charms, and their minds were
overpowered by astonishment at his beauty, and each of them wished that
she might be in his bosom for a year or a month or an hour: they removed
the veils from their faces, and their hearts were perplexed, and they
said, Joy to the person to whom this youth belongeth, or to the person
over whom he is lord! Then they imprecated evil upon the humpbacked
groom and him who was the cause of his marriage to that lovely maiden;
and every time that they prayed for blessings upon asan Bedr-ed-Deen,
they imprecated misfortunes upon the humpback.

The singing-women then beat the tambourines, and the tire-women
approached with the daughter of the Wezeer in the midst of them. They
had perfumed her with sweet scents and essences, and clad her, and
adorned her hair and neck with various ornaments, decking her with
garments such as were worn by the ancient monarchs of Persia. Among
these was a loose gown embroidered with red gold, presenting the forms
of wild beasts and birds, hanging down over her other clothes; and round
her neck was a necklace worth thousands, composed of jewels such as
neither a King of El-Yemen nor a Cesar ever collected: she was like the
moon shining in its fourteenth night, and when she approached she
resembled a ooreeyeh. Extolled be the perfection of him who
created her so splendid a being! The women encompassed her, and appeared
like stars; she, in the midst of them, being as the moon when the clouds
have withdrawn from before it. Meanwhile, asan Bedr-ed-Deen remained
sitting, with the company gazing at him; and as the bride approached
with a dignified and graceful gait, the humpbacked groom rose to her, to
kiss her; but she turned aside from him, and went and stood before
asan, the son of her uncle. The company laughed at this; and when they
beheld her turn towards asan Bedr-ed-Deen, and saw him put his hand
into his pocket and take out handfuls of gold and throw it into the
tambourine of the singing-women, they were delighted, and said, We wish
that this bride were thine:--and he smiled. All this time the humpbacked
groom was alone, looking like an ape; and every time that they lighted
his candle it went out again, and he was confounded, and remained
sitting in the dark, full of secret indignation, with all the company
surrounding him, while the lighted candles presented an appearance of
beauty that was most admirable, so that every person of reflection was
amazed at their splendour. But as to the bride, she raised her hands
towards heaven, and said, O Allah, make this to be my husband, and
relieve me from this humpbacked groom!--The tire-women then proceeded to
display the bride in different dresses, to the seventh suit, before
asan Bedr-ed-Deen of El-Barah, the humpbacked groom remaining alone;
and when they had finished this ceremony they gave permission to the
company to depart: so all who were present at the festivity, both women
and children, went out, except asan Bedr-ed-Deen and the humpbacked
groom; after which the tire-women conducted the bride to an inner
chamber, to take off her ornaments and outer robes, and to prepare her
for the bridegroom's visit.

Upon this, the humpbacked groom approached asan Bedr-ed-Deen, and said
to him, O my master, thou hast made us happy by thy company this night,
and overwhelmed us with thy favours; but now wherefore dost thou not
rise and go to thy house without thy being ejected? He answered, In the
name of Allah;--and rose, and went out from the door: but the 'Efreet
met him, and said unto him, Stay, O Bedr-ed-Deen; and when the humpback
retires into the private closet, enter thou and seat thyself in the
bride-chamber; and when the bride cometh, say to her, I am thy husband;
and the King had not recourse to this stratagem from any other motive
than his fearing for thee the effect of the eye; and this
whom thou hast seen is one of our grooms:--then approach her, and
uncover her face, and fear no evil from any one.



While Bedr-ed-Deen was thus conversing with the 'Efreet, lo, the groom
entered the closet, and seated himself; and immediately the 'Efreet rose
before him, from the trough of water that was in the closet,
in the form of a mouse, and cried Zeek!--What brought thee here? said
the humpback. The mouse then increased in size, and became like a cat;
and then increased, and became a dog, and cried, 'Owh! 'Owh! At the
sight of this the groom was terrified, and exclaimed, Get away, thou
unlucky! The dog, however, still increased and swelled until
it became an ass, and brayed in his face, crying, Ha! Ha!--upon which
the groom, in terror, cried out, Come to my aid, O people of the house!
But lo, the ass increased, and became like a buffalo, and, stopping up
the place before him, spoke with the speech of a son of Adam, and said,
Wo be to thee, O humpback! O filthiest of grooms! Upon this the groom
was seized with a colick, and seated himself upon the slabs, and his
teeth knocked together. The 'Efreet then said to him, Hath the earth
become narrow to thee, that thou wouldst marry none but my mistress? But
the groom was silent. Return me an answer, said the 'Efreet, or I will
make thine abode to be in the dust!--By Allah, then answered the groom,
I am not in fault; for they compelled me, and I knew not that she had a
lover among the buffaloes; but now I repent before Allah and before
thee. Then the 'Efreet said, I swear by Allah that if thou depart now
from this place, or utter a word before the sun hath risen, I will slay
thee: and when the sun hath risen go thy way, and never return to this
house. And he seized the humpbacked groom, and, placing his head upside
down upon the slabs, and his feet upwards, said to him, Remain here, and
I will watch thee until sunrise.--Thus did it happen to the humpback.