CONTINUATION OF THE STORY OF KING YOONAN AND THE SAGE DOOBAN.

And thou, O King, continued the Wezeer of King Yoonan, if thou trust in
this sage, he will kill thee in the foulest manner. If thou continue to
bestow favours upon him, and to make him thine intimate companion, he
will plot thy destruction. Dost thou not see that he hath cured thee of
the disease by external means, by a thing that thou heldest in thy hand?
Therefore thou art not secure against his killing thee by a thing that
thou shalt hold in the same manner.--King Yoonan answered, Thou hast
spoken truth: the case is as thou hast said, O faithful Wezeer: it is
probable that this sage came as a spy to accomplish my death; and if he
cured me by a thing I held in my hand, he may destroy me by a thing that
I may smell: what then, O Wezeer, shall be done respecting him? The
Wezeer answered, Send to him immediately, and desire him to come hither;
and when he is come, strike off his head, and so shalt thou avert from
thee his evil design, and be secure from him. Betray him before he
betray thee.--The King said, Thou hast spoken right.

Immediately, therefore, he sent for the sage, who came, full of joy, not
knowing what the Compassionate had decreed against him, and
addressed the King with these words of the poet:--

  If I fail any day to render thee due thanks, tell me for whom I have
    composed my verse and prose.
  Thou hast loaded me with favours unsolicited, bestowed without delay
    on thy part, or excuse.
  How then should I abstain from praising thee as thou deservest,
    and lauding thee both with my heart and voice?
  Nay, I will thank thee for thy benefits conferred upon me: they are
    light upon my tongue, though weighty to my back.

Knowest thou, said the King, wherefore I have summoned thee? The sage
answered, None knoweth what is secret but God, whose name be exalted!
Then said the King, I have summoned thee that I may take away thy life.
The sage, in the utmost astonishment at this announcement, said, O King,
wherefore wouldst thou kill me, and what offence hath been committed by
me? The King answered, It hath been told me that thou art a spy, and
that thou hast come hither to kill me: but I will prevent thee by
killing thee first:--and so saying, he called out to the executioner,
Strike off the head of this traitor, and relieve me from his
wickedness,--Spare me, said the sage, and so may God spare thee; and
destroy me not, lest God destroy thee.--And he repeated these words
several times, like as I did, O 'Efreet; but thou wouldst not let me go,
desiring to destroy me.



King Yoonan then said to the sage Dooban, I shall not be secure unless
I kill thee; for thou curedst me by a thing that I held in my hand, and
I have no security against thy killing me by a thing that I may smell,
or by some other means.--O King, said the sage, is this my recompense
from thee? Dost thou return evil for good?--The King answered, Thou must
be slain without delay. When the sage, therefore, was convinced that the
King intended to put him to death, and that his fate was inevitable, he
lamented the benefit that he had done to the undeserving. The
executioner then advanced, and bandaged his eyes, and, having drawn his
sword, said, Give permission. Upon this the sage wept, and said again,
Spare me, and so may God spare thee; and destroy me not, lest God
destroy thee! Wouldst thou return me the recompense of the
crocodile?--What, said the King, is the story of the crocodile? The sage
answered, I cannot relate it while in this condition; but I
conjure thee by Allah to spare me, and so may He spare thee. And he wept
bitterly. Then one of the chief officers of the King arose, and said, O
King, give up to me the blood of this sage; for we have not seen him
commit any offence against thee; nor have we seen him do aught but cure
thee of thy disease, which wearied the other physicians and sages. The
King answered, Ye know not the reason wherefore I would kill the sage:
it is this, that if I suffered him to live, I should myself inevitably
perish; for he who cured me of the disease under which I suffered by a
thing that I held in my hand, may kill me by a thing that I may smell;
and I fear that he would do so, and would receive an appointment on
account of it; seeing that it is probable he is a spy who hath come
hither to kill me; I must therefore kill him, and then shall I feel
myself safe.--The sage then said again, Spare me, and so may God spare
thee; and destroy me not, lest God destroy thee.

But he now felt certain, O 'Efreet, that the King would put him to
death, and that there was no escape for him; so he said, O King, if my
death is indispensable, grant me some respite, that I may return to my
house, and acquit myself of my duties, and give directions to my family
and neighbours to bury me, and dispose of my medical books; and among my
books is one of most especial value, which I offer as a present to thee,
that thou mayest treasure it in thy library.--And what, said the King,
is this book? He answered, It contains things not to be enumerated; and
the smallest of the secret virtues that it possesses is this; that, when
thou hast cut off my head, if thou open this book, and count three
leaves, and then read three lines on the page to the left, the head will
speak to thee, and answer whatever thou shalt ask. At this the King was
excessively astonished, and shook with delight, and said to him, O Sage,
when I have cut off thy head will it speak? He answered, Yes, O King;
and this is a wonderful thing.

The King then sent him in the custody of guards; and the sage descended
to his house, and settled all his affairs on that day; and on the
following day he went up to the court: and the Emeers and Wezeers, and
Chamberlains and Deputies, and all the great officers of the state, went
thither also: and the court resembled a flower-garden. And when
the sage had entered, he presented himself before the King, bearing an
old book, and a small pot containing a powder: and he sat down, and
said, Bring me a tray. So they brought him one; and he poured out the
powder into it, and spread it. He then said, O King, take this book, and
do nothing with it until thou hast cut off my head; and when thou hast
done so, place it upon this tray, and order some one to press it down
upon the powder; and when this is done, the blood will be stanched: then
open the book. As soon as the sage had said this, the King gave orders
to strike off his head; and it was done. The King then opened the book,
and found that its leaves were stuck together; so he put his finger to
his mouth, and moistened it with his spittle, and opened the first leaf,
and the second, and the third; but the leaves were not opened without
difficulty. He opened six leaves, and looked at them; but found upon
them no writing. So he said, O Sage, there is nothing written in it. The
head of the sage answered, Turn over more leaves. The King did so; and
in a little while, the poison penetrated into his system; for the book
was poisoned; and the King fell back, and cried out, The poison hath
penetrated into me!--and upon this, the head of the sage Dooban repeated
these verses:--

  They made use of their power, and used it tyrannically; and soon
    it became as though it never had existed.
  Had they acted equitably, they had experienced equity; but they
    oppressed; wherefore fortune oppressed them with calamities
    and trials.
  Then did the case itself announce to them, This is the reward of
    your conduct, and fortune is blameless.

And when the head of the sage Dooban had uttered these words, the King
immediately fell down dead.