NOTES TO CHAPTER FOURTH.

NOTE 1. From the close of Chapter iii., the order of the tales in this
translation (agreeably with the Cairo edition) differs from that which
is followed in the old version.

NOTE 2. This alludes to the poor man's want of sufficient clothing; for,
in the climate of Baghdad, a person who is not very scantily clad is in
little need of a fire to warm himself.

NOTE 3. My sheykh has remarked, in a marginal note, that these verses
would be appropriate only from the mouth of a learned man complaining of
the unprofitableness of his science with respect to procuring him money;
but perhaps, in writing this, he was actuated by a somewhat over-zealous
regard for the honour of his own profession; for, when a poor man has
acquired a little knowledge, his neighbours are apt to flatter him.

NOTE 4. The "izar" has been described in the second note to Chapter iii.

NOTE 5. Literally, "the sons of thine uncle;" but the meaning is, "thy
kinsmen."

NOTE 6.--_On Bastinading._ In Arabian, and some other Eastern,
countries, it is a common custom, when a person is accused of a crime
before a magistrate, and denies his guilt, to bastinade him, in order to
induce him to confess; and even witnesses, sometimes, are treated in the
same manner. The beating is usually inflicted with a kurbaj (a thong or
whip of hippopotamus' hide hammered into a round form) or with a stick,
and generally on the soles of the feet. For this purpose the feet are
confined by a chain or rope attached at each end to a staff, which is
turned round to tighten it. This is called a "falaah." Two persons (one
on each side) strike alternately; and the punishment is often continued
until the sufferer becomes insensible, and even longer.

NOTE 7.--_Of Sales by Auction._ In many of the soos (market-streets, or
bazars) in Arabian cities, auctions are held on stated days, once or
more frequently in every week. They are conducted by brokers (dellals),
hired either by private persons or by shopkeepers. These brokers carry
the goods up and down the street, announcing the sums bidden, with cries
of "araj," &c.; and the shopkeepers, as well as others, purchase of
them.

NOTE 8. I have before mentioned, that this horrid mode of punishing a
woman suspected of incontinence is not unfrequently practised among the
Arabs. Many similar cases have been mentioned to me in Egypt as having
occurred in that country in the present age; and often the murder is
committed by the father or a brother of the woman, as her relations are
considered as more disgraced than the husband by her crime. The present
tale is probably founded on some particular occurrence of this kind. One
is related as having happened in the reign of the Khaleefeh El-Moataid.
In this case, some limbs of the murdered woman, in two leathern bags,
were brought up from the bed of the Tigris in the net of a
fisherman. [Such barbarity, however, is contrary to law, as is
stated in two former notes.--ED.]

NOTE 9.--_Of the Retaliation of Injuries on the Day of Resurrection._
The "examination being past, and every one's works weighed in a just
balance, that mutual retaliation will follow according to which every
creature will take vengeance one of another, or have satisfaction made
to him for the injuries which he hath suffered. And since there will
then be no other way of returning like for like, the manner of giving
this satisfaction will be, by taking away a proportionable part of the
good works of him who offered the injury, and adding it to those of him
who suffered it. Which being done, if the angels (by whose ministry this
is to be performed) say, 'Lord, we have given to every one his due, and
there remaineth of this person's good works so much as equalleth the
weight of an ant,' God will of his mercy cause it to be doubled unto
him, that he may be admitted into Paradise; but if, on the contrary, his
good works be exhausted, and there remain evil works only, and there be
any who have not yet received satisfaction from him, God will order that
an equal weight of their sins be added unto his, that he may be punished
for them in their stead, and he will be sent to Hell laden with
both."

NOTE 10. "Reyan" is a common proper name of men, now commonly given to
slaves; and the name of the sweet basil in particular (also called
"reean") and of sweet-smelling plants in general. It also signifies
"any favour of God," "the supplies necessary for subsistence," "a son,"
&c.

NOTE 11. This ejaculation is addressed to God.

NOTE 12. In the original, "Mir," _vulg._, "Mar." This is the name
which the Arabs give to Egypt, and which they have also given to its
successive capitals, or seats of government, Memphis, Egyptian Babylon,
El-Fusa, and El-ahireh, or Cairo. It is here applied to Cairo, as
will be shewn by the following note, and by the sequel of the tale,
though this city was not founded until long after the reign of Haroon
Er-Rasheed. I may here remark, that I have not found the name of "Mir"
applied to Cairo in any Arabic work anterior to the conquest of Egypt by
the 'Osmanlee Turks, which happened in the year of the Flight 923 (A.D.
1517). El-Fusa retained this appellation in the time of Es-Suyooee,
who died in the year of the Flight 911, but it ceased to do so before
the time of El-Is-aee, who brought down his history to the month of
Ramaan, 1032 (A.D. 1623). It is probable, therefore, that the name of
"Misr" was transferred to Cairo on the occasion of the
conquest by the Turks. I must not assert, that this observation alone
enables us to form a decided judgment as to the period when this work
was composed, as it may be objected that copyists have perhaps
substituted "Mir" for "El-ahireh;" but I persue the inquiry in the
next note.

NOTE 13.--_On several Evidences of the Period when this Work, in the
states in which it is known to us, was composed or compiled or
remodelled._ The tale here presents another anachronism. The title of
"Sulan," as a prefix, was first borne by Mamood Ibn-Sabuktekeen, in
the year of the Flight 393, just two hundred years after the death of
Haroon Er-Rasheed; and there was no Sulan of Egypt until the year of
the Flight 567 of a little later; the first being the famous
ala-ed-Deen, or Saladin.

I have now given several data upon which to found a reasonable opinion
as to the age when these tales, in the states in which they are known
to us, were composed or compiled or remodelled. First, in Note 55 to
in accordance with the distinction of Muslims, Christians, and Jews, by
the colours of their turbans, which mode of distinction originated in
the beginning of the eighth century of the Flight. Secondly, in the
present note, I have mentioned a fact which affords some reason for
inferring that there had been a long series of Sulans in Egypt before
the age of the writer or writers. In the third place, I must remark,
that all the events described in this work are said to have happened in
ages which, with respect to that of the writer or writers, were
_ancient_, being related to an ancient king; from which I think we may
infer its age to have been at least two centuries posterior to the
period mentioned in the first of these data. Fourthly, in Note 22 to
described in many of these tales agrees, in a most important point of
view, with the manners and morals of the Arabs at the commencement of
the tenth century of the Flight. This I regard as an argument of great
weight, and especially satisfactory as agreeing with the inference just
before drawn. Fifthly, from what I have stated in the note immediately
preceding, I incline to the opinion that few of the copies of this work
now known to us, if any, were written until after the conquest of Egypt
by the Turks, in the year 1517 of our era. This opinion, it should be
remarked, respects especially the _early_ portion of the work, which is
the least likely to have been interpolated, as later parts evidently
have been. At the last-mentioned period, a native of Cairo (in which
city I believe the principal portion of the work to have been written)
might, if about forty years of age, retain a sufficient recollection of
the later Memlook Sulans and of their ministers to describe his kings
and courts without the necessity of consulting the writings of
historians; deriving his knowledge of early times not from the perusal
of any regular record, but only from traditions or from works like the
present.--I should have delayed the insertion of the foregoing remarks,
had I not considered it a point of some importance to suggest to the
reader, as early as possible, that the manners and customs, and in
general even the dresses and dwellings, described in most of the present
tales, are those of a very late period. The lax state of morals which
appears to have prevailed among the Arabs in the time of the writer or
writers probably continued at least until the period when coffee became
a common beverage, about the middle of the tenth century of the Flight
(or near the middle of the sixteenth century of our era), and perhaps
considerably later, until some years after the introduction of tobacco
into the East. The researches of Von Hammer have satisfactorily shewn
that the Thousand and One Nights, in the states in which it is known to
us, is based upon a very old work, in Persian; an Arabic translation of
which bore a similar, or perhaps the same, title as that which we are
considering; but I believe the last to be, in its best features, a very
late production.

NOTE 14. "Shems-ed-Deen" signifies "the Sun of the Religion;" and
"Noor-ed-Deen," "the Light of the Religion."

NOTE 15.--_Customs observed after a Death._ Though the men, in Arabian
countries, make no change in their dress in indication of mourning, they
observe other customs after the death of a relation. By the term here
used in the original for "mourning" ("'aza," the primary signification
of which is "consolation" or "condolence"), an allusion is made to
receiving the visits of condoling friends. On the night immediately
following the burial, several persons are employed to perform
recitations of portions of the ur-an, &c. The most remarkable of these
ceremonies consists in repeating thrice one thousand times, "There is no
deity but God:" one of the performers having a string of a thousand
large beads by means of which to count these repetitions. Some persons
are also hired to perform a recitation of the whole of the ur-an in the
afternoon or evening of the first Thursday after the funeral, and often
on other days; and the merit of these and the former religious acts is
transferred to the soul of the deceased.--These customs I have fully
described in my work on the Modern Egyptians, vol. ii. ch. xv.

NOTE 16. The island here alluded to is that called "Er-Roah," or "The
Garden."

NOTE 17. The prayer-carpet, which resembles a wide hearth-rug, is seldom
used as a covering for the saddle except when the rider is a person of
the learned profession. It is probably mentioned here to shew that
Noor-ed-Deen was an officer of the pen, which was generally the case
with the Wezeers of the Sulans of Egypt.

NOTE 18. Jerusalem is called in the original, and by the modern Arabs,
"El-uds," which signifies "Holiness."

NOTE 19. The Arabic name of Aleppo is "alab."

NOTE 20. An Arab of rank is seldom seen on foot outside the threshold of
his own house, unless it be merely to cross the street.

NOTE 21. The decoration here alluded to consists in furnishing the
apartment with costly carpets, handsome cushions, rich coverings for the
deewans, and coloured lamps, &c.

NOTE 22. This, to some readers, may appear odd: it should therefore be
explained that most articles of Arab clothing are equally suitable to
young and old, thin and stout.

NOTE 23. "asan" signifies "Beautiful" or "Handsome."

NOTE 24.--_On Infancy and Education._ I may avoid an unnecessary
multiplication of notes on the same, or nearly the same, subject, by
availing myself of this occasion to insert here the following
illustrations of numerous passages, in the preceding and subsequent
tales, relating to infancy and education.

In few cases are the Mohammadans so much fettered by the directions of
their Prophet and other religious institutors as in the rearing and
educating of their children. In matters of the most trivial nature,
religious precedents direct their management of the young. One of the
first duties is, to wrap the new-born child in clean white linen, or in
linen of some other colour; but not yellow. After this, some person [not
a female] should pronounce the adan in the ear of the infant,
because the Prophet did so in the ear of El-asan when Fatimeh gave
birth to him; or he should pronounce the adan in the right ear, and the
iameh (which is nearly the same) in the left.

It was formerly a custom of many of the Arabs, and perhaps is still
among some, for the father to give a feast to his friends on seven
successive days after the birth of a son; but that of a daughter was
observed with less rejoicing. The general modern custom is, to give an
entertainment only on the seventh day, which is called "Yom es-Subooa."
On this occasion, the mother, having left her bed, receives her guests;
the child is exhibited to them; and they give presents of gold or silver
coins, which are generally used to decorate the infant's head-dress. The
father entertains his friends in the evening.

On this day, or on the fourteenth, twenty-first, twenty-eighth, or
thirty-fifth day after the birth, several religious ceremonies are
required to be performed; but they are most approved if observed on the
seventh day. One of these is the naming. I believe, however, that it is
a more common custom to give the name almost immediately after the
birth, or about three hours after. Astrologers were often consulted on
this occasion; but the following directions are given on higher
authority, and are generally observed.--"The father should give his son
a good name, ... not a name of self-praise, as Rasheed , Emeen
, &c.... The prophet said, 'The names most approved by God are
'Abd-Allah  and 'Abd-Er-Raman [Servant of the
Compassionate], and such like.' He also said, 'Give my name, but do not
distinguish by my surname of relationship:' but this precept, they say,
respects his own life-time, ... because he was addressed, 'O
Abu-l-asim!' and now it is not disapproved; but some disapprove of
uniting the name and surname, so as to call a person Mohammad and
Abu-l-asim. And if a son be called by the name of a prophet it is not
allowable to abuse or vilify him, unless the person so named be facing
his reproacher, who should say, 'Thou' :
and a child named Moammad or Amad should be  honoured....
The Prophet said, 'There is no people holding a consultation at which
there is present one whose name is Moammad or Amad, but God blesseth
all that assembly:' and again he said, 'Whoever nameth his child by my
name, or by that of any of my children or my companions, from affection
to me or to them, God (whose name be exalted!) will give him in Paradise
what eye hath not seen nor ear heard.' And a son should not be named
King of kings, or Lord of lords; nor should a man take a surname of
relationship from the name of the eldest of his children; nor take any
such surname before a child is born to him."--The custom of naming
children after prophets, or after relations or companions of Moammad,
is very common. No ceremony is observed on account of the naming.

On the same day, however, two practices which I am about to mention are
prescribed to be observed; though, as far as my observations and
inquiries allow me to judge, they are generally neglected by the modern
Muslims. The first of these is a sacrifice. The victim is called
'aeeah. It should be a ram or goat; or two such animals should be
sacrificed for a son, and one for a daughter. This rite is regarded by
Ibn-ambal as absolutely obligatory: he said, "If a father sacrifice not
for his son, and he  die, that son will not intercede for him
on the day of judgment." The founders of the three other principal sects
regard it in different and less important lights, though Mohammad slew
an 'aeeah for himself after his prophetic mission. The person should
say, on slaying the victim, "O God, verily this aeeah is a ransom
for my son such a one; its blood for his blood, and its flesh for his
flesh, and its bone for his bone, and its skin for his skin, and its
hair for his hair. O God, make it a ransom for my son from Hell-fire." A
bone of the victim should not be broken. The midwife should receive
a leg of it. It should be cooked without previously cutting off any
portion of it; and part of it should be given in alms.--After this
should be performed the other ceremony above alluded to, which is this.
It is a sunneh ordinance, incumbent on the father, to shave, or cause to
be shaved, the head of his child, and to give, in alms to the poor, the
weight of the hair in gold or silver. This should also be done for a
proselyte. On the subsequent occasions of shaving the head of a
male child (for the head of the male is frequently shaven), a tuft of
hair is generally left on the crown, and commonly, for several years,
another also over the forehead.

Circumcision is most approved if performed on the same day: but the
observance of this rite is generally delayed until the child has
attained the age of five or six years, and sometimes several years
later. I shall therefore delay mentioning the ceremonies with which it
is celebrated.

The Muslims rightly regard a child as a trust committed by God to its
parents, who, they hold, are responsible for the manner in which they
bring it up, and will be examined on this subject on the day of
judgment. But they further venture to say, that "the first who will lay
hold of a man on the day of judgment will be his wife and children, who
 will present themselves
before God, and say, 'O our Lord, take for us our due from him; for he
taught us not that of which we were ignorant, and he fed us with
forbidden food, and we knew not:' and their due will be taken from
him." By this is meant, that a certain proportion of the good works
which the man may have done, and his children and wife neglected, will
be set down to their account; or that a similar proportion of their evil
works will be transferred to _his_ account.

The mother is enjoined by the law to give suck to her child two full
years, unless she have her husband's consent to shorten the period, or
to employ another nurse. "For suckling the child, a virtuous woman, who
eateth only what is lawful, should be chosen; for the unlawful 
will manifest its evil in the child: as the Prophet ... said, 'Giving
suck altereth the tempers.' But it is recommended by the sunneh that the
mother herself suckle the child; for it is said in a tradition, 'There
is nothing better for a child than its mother's milk.' 'If thou wouldst
try,' it is added,'whether a child be of an ingenuous disposition in its
infancy, or not, order a woman who is not its mother to suckle it after
its mother has done so; and if it drink of the milk of the woman who is
not its mother, it is not of an ingenuous disposition.'"

Children, being regarded by Muslim parents as enviable blessings, are,
to them, objects of the most anxious solicitude. To guard them from the
supposed influence of the envious or evil eye, they have recourse to
various expedients. When they are taken abroad, they are usually clad in
the most slovenly manner, and left unwashed, or even purposely smeared
with dirt; and as a further precaution, a fantastic cap is often put
upon the child's head, or its head-dress is decorated with one or more
coins, a feather, a gay tassel, or a written charm or two sewed up in
leather or encased in gold or silver, or some other appendage to attract
the eye, that so the infant itself may pass unnoticed. If a person
express his admiration of another's child otherwise than by some pious
ejaculation, as, for instance, by praising its Creator (with the
exclamation of "Subana-llah!" or, "Ma shaa-llah!" &c.) or invoking a
blessing on the Prophet, he fills the mind of the parent with
apprehension; and recourse is had to some superstitious ceremony to
counteract the dreaded influence of his envious glance. The children of
the poor are less exposed to this imaginary danger from their
unattractive appearance: they generally have little clothing, or none
whatever, and are extremely dirty. It is partly with the view of
protecting them from the evil eye, that those of the rich are so long
confined to the areem: there they are petted and pampered for several
years; at least until they are of age to go to school; but most of them
are instructed at home.

The children of the Muslims are taught to shew to their fathers a degree
of respect which might be deemed incompatible with the existence of a
tender mutual affection; but I believe that this is not the case. The
child greets the father in the morning by kissing his hand, and then
usually stands before him in a respectful attitude, with the left hand
covered by the right, to receive any order or to await his permission to
depart; but after the respectful kiss, is often taken on the lap. After
the period of infancy, the well-bred son seldom sits in the presence of
his father; but during that period he is generally allowed much
familiarity. A Syrian merchant, who was one of my near neighbours in
Cairo, had a child of exquisite beauty, commonly supposed to be his
daughter, whom, though he was a most bigoted Muslim, he daily took with
him from his private house to his shop. The child followed him, seated
upon an ass, before a black slave; and, until about six years old, was
dressed like most young ladies, but without a face-veil. The father then
thinking that the appearance of taking about with him a daughter of that
age was scandalous, dressed his pet as a boy, and told his friends that
the female attire had been employed as a protection against the evil
eye; girls being less coveted than boys. This indeed is sometimes done;
and it is possible that such might have been the case in this instance;
but I was led to believe that it was not so. A year after, I left
Cairo: while I remained there, I continued to see the child pass my
house as before; but always in boy's clothing.

It is not surprising that the natives of Arabian countries, where a very
trifling expense is required to rear the young, should be generally
desirous of a numerous offspring. A motive of self-interest conduces
forcibly to cherish this feeling in a wife, for she is commonly esteemed
by her husband in proportion to her fruitfulness; and a man is seldom
willing to divorce a wife, or to sell a slave, who has borne him a
child. A similar feeling also induces in both parents a desire to obtain
offspring, and renders them at the same time resigned to the loss of
such of their children as die in tender age. This feeling arises from
their belief of certain services, of greater moment than the richest
blessings this world can bestow, which children who die in infancy are
to render to their parents. The Prophet is related to have said, "The
infant children  shall assemble at the scene of judgment
on the day of the general resurrection, when all creatures shall appear
for the reckoning, and it will be said to the angels, 'Go ye with these
into Paradise:' and they will halt at the gate of Paradise, and it will
be said to them, 'Welcome to the offspring of the Muslims! enter ye
Paradise: there is no reckoning to be made with you:' and they will
reply, 'Yea, and our fathers and our mothers:' but the guardians of
Paradise will say, 'Verily your fathers and your mothers are not with
you because they have committed faults and sins for which they must be
reckoned with and inquired of.' Then they will shriek and cry at the
gate of Paradise with a great cry; and God (whose name be exalted!) and
who is all-knowing respecting them) will say, 'What is this cry?' It
will be answered, 'O our Lord, the children of the Muslims say, We will
not enter Paradise but with our fathers and our mothers.' Whereupon God
(whose name be exalted!) will say 'Pass among them all, and take the
hands of your parents, and introduce them into Paradise.'" The children
who are to have this power are such as are born of believers, and die
without having attained to the knowledge of sin; and according to one
tradition, one such child will introduce his parents into Paradise.
[Such infants only are to enter Paradise; for, of the children who die
in infancy, those of believers alone are they who would believe if they
grew to years of discretion.] On the same authority it is said, "When a
child of the servant  dies, God (whose name be exalted!) saith
to the angels, 'Have ye taken the child of my servant?' They answer,
'Yea.' He saith, 'Have ye taken the child of his heart?' They reply,
'Yea.' He asketh them, 'What did my servant say?' They answer, 'He
praised thee, and said, Verily to God we belong, and verily unto Him we
return!' Then God will say, 'Build for my servant a house in Paradise,
and name it the House of Praise.'" To these traditions, which I find
related as proofs of the advantages of marriage, the following anecdote,
which is of a similar nature, is added. A certain man, who would not
take a wife, awoke one day from his sleep, and demanded to be married,
saying, as his reason, "I dreamt that the resurrection had taken place,
and that I was among the beings collected at the scene of judgment, but
was suffering a thirst that stopped up the passage of my stomach; and
lo, there were youths passing through the assembly, having in their
hands ewers of silver, and cups of gold, and giving drink to one person
after another; so I stretched forth my hand to one of them, and said,
'Give me to drink; for thirst overpowereth me:' but they answered, 'Thou
hast no child among us: we give drink only to our fathers.' I asked
them, 'Who are ye?' They replied, 'We are the deceased infant children
of the Muslims.'" Especial rewards in heaven are promised to
mothers. "When a woman conceives by her husband," said the Prophet, "she
is called in heaven a martyr [_i.e._ she is ranked as a martyr in
dignity]; and her labour in child-bed, and her care for her children,
protect her from Hell-fire.'"

"When the child begins to speak, the father should teach him first the
kelimeh , 'There is no deity but God: [Moammad
is God's apostle:]'--he should dictate this to him seven times. Then he
should instruct him to say, 'Wherefore, exalted be God, the King, the
Truth! There is no deity but He, the Lord of the honourable
throne.' and the
closing words of the ashr, 'He is God, beside whom there is no deity,
the King, the Holy,'" &c.

As soon as a son is old enough, his father should teach him the most
important rules of decent behaviour: placing some food before him, he
should order him to take it with the right hand (the left being employed
for unclean purposes), and to say, on commencing, "In the name of God;"
to eat what is next to him, and not to hurry, nor spill any of the food
upon his person or dress. He should teach him that it is disgusting to
eat much. He should particularly condemn to him the love of gold and
silver, and caution him against covetousness as he would against
serpents and scorpions; and forbid his spitting in an assembly, and
committing any similar breach of good manners, talking much, turning his
back upon another, standing in an indolent attitude, and speaking ill of
any person to another. He should keep him from bad companions, teach him
the ur-an and all requisite divine and prophetic ordinances, and
instruct him in the arts of swimming and archery, and in some virtuous
trade; for trade is a security from poverty. He should also command him
to endure patiently the chastisements of his teacher. In one tradition
it is said, "When a boy attains the age of six years he should be
disciplined; and when he attains to nine years he should be put in a
separate bed; and when he attains to ten years he should be beaten for
 prayer:" in another tradition, "Order your children to pray
at seven  it at ten, and put them
in separate beds."

Circumcision, which has before been mentioned, is generally performed
before the boy is submitted to the instruction of the schoolmaster.
Previously to the performance of this rite, he is, if belonging to the
higher or middle rank of society, usually paraded about the
neighbourhood of his parents' dwelling, gaily attired, chiefly with
female habits and ornaments, but with a boy's turban on his head,
mounted on a horse, preceded by musicians, and followed by a group of
his female relations and friends. This ceremony is observed by the great
with much pomp and with sumptuous feasts. El-Jabartee mentions a fete
celebrated on the occasion of the circumcision of a son of the aee of
Cairo, in the year of the Flight 1179 (A.D. 1766), when the grandees and
chief merchants and 'ulama of the city sent him such abundance of
presents that the magazines of his mansion were filled with rice and
butter and honey and sugar; the great hall, with coffee; and the middle
of the court, with firewood: the public were amused for many days by
players and performers of various kinds; and when the youth was paraded
through the streets he was attended by numerous memlooks with their
richly-caparisoned horses and splendid arms and armour and military
band, and by a number of other youths who, from compliment to him, were
circumcised afterwards with him. This latter custom is usual on such
occasions; and so also is the sending of presents, such as those above
mentioned, by friends, acquaintances, and tradespeople.' At a fete of
this kind, when the Khaleefeh El-Mutedir circumcised five of his sons,
the money that was scattered in presents amounted to six hundred
thousand pieces of gold, or about 300,000. Many orphans were also
circumcised on the same day, and were presented with clothes and pieces
of gold. The Khaleefeh above mentioned was famous for his
magnificence, a proof of which I have given in a former note. At the
more approved entertainments which are given in celebration of a
circumcision, a recital of the whole of the ur-an, or a zikr, is
performed: at some others, male or female public dancers perform in the
court of the house, or in the street before the door.

Few of the children of the Arabs receive much instruction in literature,
and still fewer are taught even the rudiments of any of the higher
sciences; but there are numerous schools in their towns, and one at
least in almost every moderately large village. The former are mostly
attached to mosques and other public buildings, and, together with those
buildings, endowed by princes or other men of rank, or wealthy
tradesmen. In these, the children are instructed either gratis or for a
very trifling weekly payment, which all parents, except those in
indigent circumstances, can easily afford. The schoolmaster generally
teaches nothing more than to read, and to recite by heart the whole of
the ur-an. After committing to memory the first chapter of the sacred
volume, the boy learns the rest in the inverse order of their
arrangement, as they generally decrease in length. Writing and
arithmetic are usually taught by another master; and grammar, rhetoric,
versification, logic, the interpretation of the ur-an, and the whole
system of religion and law, with all other knowledge deemed useful,
which seldom includes the mere elements of mathematics, are attained by
studying at a collegiate mosque, and at no expense; for the professors
receive no pay either from the students, who are mostly of the poorer
classes, or from the funds of the mosque.

The wealthy often employ for their sons a private tutor; and, when he
has taught them to read, and to recite the ur-an, engage for them a
writing-master, and then send them to the college. But among this class,
polite literature is more considered than any other branch of knowledge,
after religion. Such an acquaintance with the works of some of their
favourite poets as enables a man to quote them occasionally in society,
is regarded by the Arabs as essential to a son who is to mix in genteel
company; and to this acquirement is often added some skill in the art of
versification, which is rendered peculiarly easy by the copiousness of
the Arabic language, and by its system of inflection. These
characteristics of their noble tongue (which are remarkably exhibited by
the custom, common among the Arabs, of preserving the same rhyme
throughout a whole poem), while on the one hand they have given an
admirable freedom to the compositions of men of true poetic genius, have
on the other hand mainly contributed to the degradation of Arabic
poetry. To an Arab of some little learning it is almost as easy to speak
in verse as in prose; and hence he often intersperses his prose
writings, and not unfrequently his conversation, with indifferent
verses, of which the chief merit often consists in puns, or in an
ingenious use of several words nearly the same in sound, but differing
in sense. To a reader unacquainted with the Arabic language it is
necessary to explain this custom; otherwise he would imagine that the
author of the present work is merely indulging in a dramatic licence
inconsistent with a true delineation of manners, when he makes a person
suddenly change the style of his speech from prose to verse, and then
revert to the former.

One more duty of a father to a son I should here mention: it is, to
procure for him a wife as soon as he has arrived at a proper age. This
age is decided by some to be twenty years; though many young men marry
at an earlier period. It is said, "When a son has attained the age of
twenty years, his father, if able, should marry him, and then take his
hand, and say, 'I have disciplined thee, and taught thee, and married
thee: I now seek refuge with God from thy mischief in the present world
and the next.'" To enforce this duty, the following tradition is urged:
"When a son attains to the age of puberty, and his father does not marry
him, and yet is able to do so, if the youth commit an improper act in
consequence, the sin of it is between the two,"--or, as in another
report,--"on the father." The same is held to be the case with
respect to a daughter who has attained the age of twelve years.

The female children of the Arabs are seldom taught even to read. Though
they are admissible at the daily schools in which the boys are
instructed, very few parents allow them the benefit of this privilege;
preferring, if they give them any instruction of a literary kind, to
employ a sheykhah (or learned woman) to teach them at home. She
instructs them in the forms of prayer, and teaches them to repeat by
heart a few chapters of the ur-an; very rarely the whole book. Parents
are indeed recommended to withhold from their daughters some portions of
the ur-an; to "teach them the Soorat en-Noor , and
keep from them the Soorat-Yoosuf ; on account of the story
of Zeleekha and Yoosuf in the latter, and the prohibitions and threats
and mention of punishments contained in the former."

Needlework is not so rarely, but yet not generally, taught to Arab
girls: the spindle frequently employs those of the poorer classes; and
some of them learn to weave. The daughters of persons of the middle and
higher ranks are often instructed in the art of embroidery, and in other
ornamental work, which are taught in schools and in private houses.
Singing, and playing upon the lute, which were formerly not uncommon
female accomplishments among the wealthy Arabs, are now almost
exclusively confined, like dancing, to professional performers and a few
of the slaves in the areems of the great: it is very seldom now that
any musical instrument is seen in the hand of an Arab lady, except a
kind of drum called darabukkeh, and a ar (or tambourine), which are
found in many areems, and are beaten with the fingers. Some care,
however, is bestowed by the ladies in teaching their daughters what they
consider an elegant gait and carriage, as well as various alluring and
voluptuous arts with which to increase the attachment of their future
husbands.

NOTE 25.--_Water-wheels._ The water-wheels here mentioned are machines
commonly used for the purpose of irrigating fields and gardens. They are
generally turned by a pair of cows or bulls. They raise the water from a
river or well in a series of earthen pots attached to cords which pass
over a vertical wheel, and pour it into a trough, from which it flows in
narrow channels through the space of ground to be irrigated. A cogged
vertical wheel is attached to the same axis as the former; and this, and
consequently the other also, are turned by means of a larger,
horizontal, cogged wheel. The ground is divided into hollow squares, or
furrows, into each of which in succession the water is admitted.

NOTE 26. "Bedr-ed-Deen" signifies "the Full Moon of the Religion."

NOTE 27. I have here omitted the name of Shems-ed-Deen, and his office;
as asan's knowledge of them would render the sequel of the story too
improbable even to an Arab.

NOTE 28. In the original, this paper is here said to have been written
by asan in accordance with the dictation of his father; but afterwards
it is said to have been written by the latter; and this is more
consistent with the rest of the tale.

NOTE 29. Papers of importance are often wrapped in waxed cloth to
preserve them from wet, which would efface the writing, as the Arab ink
is chiefly composed of smoke-black and gum and water.

NOTE 30. In the original, the cap is not here mentioned; but it is
afterwards.

NOTE 31. This paragraph and the verses interspersed in it are translated
from the Calcutta edition of the first two hundred nights.

NOTE 32. The poet here alluded to is El-Mutanebbee.

NOTE 33. It is a common custom of Eastern kings and governors to avail
themselves of any pretext for seizing upon the property of a deceased
officer who has accumulated much wealth.

NOTE 34. It is implied that he was sitting at the door, or in the court,
of his house.

NOTE 35. His taking a copy is mentioned afterwards in the original; but
not in this place.

NOTE 36. I have designated by the appellation of "dye-women" (from
want-of a better) those females who are employed to apply the enna,
which imparts a deep orange-red dye, to the nails or tips of the
fingers, the palms of the hands, the soles of the feet, &c. Some Arab
ladies, especially on such an occasion as that here described, are
ornamented with this dye in a more fanciful manner. The woman who
applies it is called in Arabic "munaisheh."

NOTE 37. The chief office of the tire-woman (in Arabic, "mashiah") is
to comb and plait the hair. She attends the ladies in the bath; and
hence is also called "bellaneh."

NOTE 38. A "maabah" is a bench of stone or brick, generally between
two and three feet in height, and about the same in width, built against
the front of a shop, and sometimes along the front of a private house.


NOTE 39.--_On Marriage._ Previously to the perusal of the first
description of a nuptial fete that occurs in this work, the reader may
perhaps desire some introductory information, which I shall here
endeavour to convey in such a manner as to make the present note serve
to illustrate many future allusions in these pages, and not merely the
foregoing tale.

Marriage is regarded by the Muslims in general as a positive duty; and
to neglect it, without a sufficient excuse, subjects a man to severe
reproach. "When a servant ," said the Prophet, "marries, verily
he perfects half his religion." He once asked a man, "Art thou
married?" The man answered, "No." "And art thou," said he, "sound and
healthy?" The answer was, "Yes." "Then," said Moammad, "thou art one of
the brothers of the devils; for the most wicked among you are the
unmarried; and the most vile among your dead are the unmarried; moreover
the married are those who are acquitted of filthy conversation; and by
Him in whose hand is my soul, the devil hath not a weapon more effective
against the virtuous, both men and women, than the neglect of
marriage." Some remarks on this subject, and on the advantages of
marriage, have been made in a preceding note on infancy and education.

The number of wives whom a Muslim may have at the same time is four. He
may marry free women, or take concubine slaves, or have of both these
classes. It is the opinion of most persons, I believe, among the more
strictly religious, that a man may not have more than four women,
whether they be wives alone, or concubine slaves alone, or of both
classes together; but the practice of some of the Companions of the
Prophet, who cannot be accused of violating his precepts, affords a
strong argument to the contrary. 'Alee, it is said, "was the most devout
of the Companions; but he had four wives and seventeen concubines
besides, and married, after Faimeh (may God be well pleased with her!),
among all that he married and divorced, more than two hundred women: and
sometimes he included four wives in one contract, and sometimes divorced
four at one time, taking other four in their stead." This may
perhaps be an exaggerated statement: but it is certain that the custom
of keeping an unlimited number of concubines was common among wealthy
Muslims in the first century of the Mohammadan era, and has so
continued. The famous author of the work above quoted urges the example
of Solomon to prove that the possession of numerous concubines is not
inconsistent with piety and good morals; not considering that God made
but one wife for Adam.

It has been mentioned in the first of the notes to this work, that a
Muslim may divorce his wife twice, and each time take her back. This he
may do, even against her wish, during a fixed period, which cannot
extend beyond three months, unless she be _enceinte_, in which latter
case she must wait until the birth of her child before she will be at
liberty to contract a new marriage. During this period the husband is
obliged to maintain her. If he divorce her a third time, or by a triple
sentence, he cannot take her again unless with her own consent, and by a
new contract, and after another marriage has been consummated between
her and another husband, and this husband also has divorced her.

It is not a common custom, especially among the middle ranks, for an
Arab to have more than one wife at the same time; but there are few of
middle age who have not had several different wives at different
periods, tempted to change by the facility of divorce. The case of 'Alee
has been mentioned above. Mugheyreh Ibn-Sheabeh married eighty women in
the course of his life; and several more remarkable instances of
the love of change are recorded by Arab writers: the most extraordinary
case of this kind that I have met with was that of Moammad
Ibn-E-eiyib, the Dyer, of Baghdad, who died in the year of the Flight
423, aged eighty-five years; of whom it is related, on most respectable
authority, that he married more than nine hundred women!--Supposing,
therefore, that he married his first wife when he was fifteen years of
age, he must have had, on the average, nearly thirteen wives _per
annum_. The women, in general, cannot of course marry so many successive
husbands, not only because a woman cannot have more than one husband at
a time, but also because she cannot divorce her husband. There have
been, however, many instances of Arab women who have married a
surprising number of men in rapid succession. Among these may be
mentioned Umm-Kharijeh, who gave occasion to a proverb on this subject.
This woman, who was of the tribe of Bejeeleh, in El-Yemen, married
upwards of forty husbands; and her son Kharijeh knew not who was his
father. She used to contract a marriage in the quickest possible manner:
a man saying to her, "Khibun" (betrothal), she replied, "Nik-un"
(marriage), and thus became his lawful wife. She had a very numerous
progeny; several tribes originating from her.

For the choice of a wife, a man generally relies on his mother, or some
other near female relation, or a professional female betrother (who is
called "khaibeh"); for there are many women who perform this office for
hire. The law allows him to see the face of the female whom he proposes
to marry, previously to his making the contract; but in the present day
this liberty is seldom obtained, except among the lower orders. Unless
in this case, a man is not allowed to see unveiled any woman but his own
wife or slave, and those women to whom the law prohibits his uniting
himself in marriage: nay, according to some, he is not allowed to "see"
his own niece unveiled, though he may not marry her. It should be added,
that a slave may lawfully see the face of his own mistress; but this
privilege is seldom granted in the present day to any slave but a
eunuch. An infringement of the law above mentioned is held to be
extremely sinful in both parties: "The curse of God," said the Prophet,
"is on the seer and the seen:" yet it is very often disregarded in the
case of women of the lower orders.

A man is forbidden, by the ur-an and the Sunneh, to marry his
mother, or other ascendant; daughter, or other descendant; his sister,
or half-sister; the sister of his father or mother or other ascendant;
his niece, or any of her descendants; his foster-mother who has suckled
him five times in the course of the first two years, or a woman related
to him by milk in any of the degrees which would preclude his marriage
with her if she were similarly related to him by consanguinity; the
mother of his wife, even if he has not consummated his marriage with
this wife; the daughter of his wife, if he has consummated his marriage
with the latter (but if he has not done so, and this wife is divorced
from him, or dead, he may marry her daughter); his father's wife, and
his son's wife; and to have at the same time two wives who are sisters,
or aunt and niece: he is forbidden also to marry his unemancipated
slave, or another man's slave if he has already a free wife; and to
marry any woman but one of his own faith, or a Christian, or a Jewess. A
Mohammadan woman, however, may only marry a man of her own faith. An
unlawful intercourse with any woman prevents a man from marrying any of
her relations who would be forbidden to him if she were his wife.

The reader has already seen that a cousin (the daughter of a paternal
uncle) is often chosen as a wife, on account of the tie of blood, which
is likely to attach her more strongly to her husband, or on account of
an affection conceived in early years. Parity of rank is generally much
regarded; and a man is often unable to obtain as his wife the daughter
of one of a different profession or trade, unless an inferior; or a
younger daughter when an elder remains unmarried. A girl is often
married at the age of twelve years, and sometimes at ten, or even nine:
the usual period is between twelve and sixteen years. At the age of
thirteen or fourteen she may be a mother. The young men marry a few
years later.

The most important requisite in a wife is religion. The Prophet said, "A
virtuous wife is better than the world and all that it contains." "A
virtuous wife," said Luman, "is like a crown on the head of a king; and
a wicked wife is like a heavy burden on the back of an old man." Among
the other chief requisites are agreeableness of temper, and beauty of
form (undiminished by any defect or irregularity of features or
members), moderation in the amount of dowry required, and good birth. It
is said, "if thou marry not a virgin,  marry a
divorced woman, and not a widow; for the divorced woman will respect thy
words when thou sayest, 'If there were any good in thee thou hadst not
been divorced;' whereas the widow will say, 'May God have mercy on such
a one! he hath left me to one unsuited to me.'" But according to another
selfish maxim, the woman most to be avoided is she who is divorced from
a man by whom she has had a child; for her heart is with him, and she is
an enemy to the man who marries her after.--Modesty is a requisite
upon which too much stress cannot be laid; but this, to an English
reader, requires some explanation. 'Alee asked his wife Faimeh, "Who is
the best of women?" She answered, "She who sees not men, and whom they
see not." Modesty, therefore, in the opinion of the Muslims, is
most eminently shown by a woman's concealing her person, and restraining
her eyes, from men. "The best rank of men ," said the
Prophet, "is the front; and the best rank of women is the rear:"
that is, those most distant from the men: but better than even these are
the women who pray at home.--Fruitfulness is also a desirable
qualification to be considered in the choice of a wife: "it may be known
in maidens," says the Prophet, "from their relations; because, generally
speaking, kindred are similar in disposition, &c." Lastly,
contentment is to be enumerated among the requisites. It is said, on the
same authority, "Verily the best of women are those that are most
content with little." To obtain a contented and submissive wife,
many men make their selection from among the classes inferior to them in
rank. Others, with a similar view, prefer a concubine slave in the place
of a wife.

The consent of a girl not arrived at the age of puberty is not required:
her father, or, if he is dead, her nearest adult male relation, or a
guardian appointed by will or by the aee, acts as her wekeel, or
deputy, to effect the marriage-contract for her. If of age, she appoints
her own deputy. A dowry is required to legalize the marriage; and the
least dowry allowed by the law is ten dirhems, or drachms of silver;
about five shillings of our money. Moammad married certain of his wives
for a dowry of ten dirhems and the household necessaries, which were a
handmill to grind the corn, a water-jar, and a pillow of skin or leather
stuffed with the fibres of the palm-tree, which are called "leef:" but
some he married for a dowry of five hundred dirhems. With the
increase of wealth and luxury, dowries have increased in amount; but, to
our ideas, they are still trifling; a sum equivalent to about twenty
pounds sterling being a common dowry among Arabs of the middle classes
for a virgin, and half or a third or quarter of that sum for a divorced
woman or a widow. Two-thirds of the sum is usually paid before making
the contract, and the remaining portion held in reserve to be paid to
the woman in case of her divorce or in case of the husband's death. The
father or guardian of a girl under age receives the former portion of
her dowry; but it is considered as her property, and he generally
expends it, with an additional sum from his own purse, in the purchase
of necessary furniture, dress, &c., for her, which the husband can never
take from her against her own wish.

The marriage-contract is generally, in the present day, merely verbal;
but sometimes a certificate is written, and sealed by the aee. The
most approved or propitious period for this act is the month of Showwal:
the most unpropitious, Moarram. The only persons whose presence is
required to perform it are the bridegroom (or his deputy), the bride's
deputy (who is the betrother), two male witnesses, if such can be easily
procured, and the aee or a schoolmaster or some other person to recite
a khubeh, which consists of a few words in praise of God, a form of
blessing on the Prophet, and some passages of the ur-an, respecting
marriage. They all recite the Fat'ah (or opening chapter of the
ur-an), after which the bridegroom pays the money. The latter and the
bride's deputy then seat themselves on the ground, face to face, and
grasp each other's right hand, raising the thumbs, and pressing them
against each other. Previously to the khubeh, the person who recites
this formula places a handkerchief over the two joined hands; and after
the khubeh he dictates to the two contracting parties what they are to
say. The betrother generally uses the following or a similar form of
words: "I betroth to thee my daughter 
such a one 
for a dowry of such an amount." The bridegroom answers, "I accept from
thee her betrothal to myself." This is all that is absolutely necessary;
but the address and reply are usually repeated a second and third time,
and are often expressed in fuller forms of words. The contract is
concluded with the recital of the Fat'ah by all persons present.

This betrothal, or marriage-contract, is often performed several years
before the consummation, when the two parties are yet children; or
during the infancy of the girl; but generally not more than about eight
or ten days before the former event. The household furniture and dress
prepared for the bride are sent by her family to the bridegroom's house,
usually conveyed by a train of camels, two or three or more days before
she is conducted thither.

The feasts and processions which are now to be mentioned are only
observed in the case of a virgin bride; a widow or divorced woman being
remarried in a private manner. I describe them chiefly in accordance
with the usages of Cairo, which appear to me most agreeable, in general,
with the descriptions and allusions in the present work.--The period
most commonly approved for the consummation of marriage is the eve of
Friday, or that of Monday. Previously to this event, the bridegroom once
or twice or more frequently gives a feast to his friends; and for
several nights, his house and the houses of his near neighbours are
usually illuminated by numerous clusters of lamps, or by lanterns,
suspended in front of them; some, to cords drawn across the street. To
these or other cords are also suspended small flags, or square pieces of
silk, each of two different colours, generally red and green. Some say
that the feast or feasts should be given on the occasion of the
contract; others, on the consummation; others, again, on both these
occasions. The usual custom of the people of Cairo is to give a
feast on the night immediately preceding that of the consummation, and
another on the latter night; but some commence their feasts earlier.
Respecting marriage-feasts, the Prophet said, "The first day's feast is
an incumbent duty; and the second day's, a sunneh ordinance; and the
third day's, for ostentation and notoriety:" and he forbade eating at
the feast of the ostentatious. It is a positive duty to accept an
invitation to a marriage-feast or other lawful entertainment; but the
guest is not obliged to eat. The persons invited, and all intimate
friends, generally send presents of provisions of some kind a day or two
before. The Prophet taught that marriage-feasts should be frugal: the
best that _he_ gave was with one goat. He approved of
demonstrations of joy at the celebration of a marriage with songs, and,
according to one tradition, by the beating of deffs (or tambourines);
but in another tradition the latter practice is condemned. The
preferable mode of entertaining the guests is by the performance of a
zikr.

The bride is conducted to the bridegroom's house in the afternoon
immediately preceding the night of consummation. On the day next
preceding that on which she is conducted thither, she goes to the public
bath, accompanied by a number of her female relations and friends. The
procession generally pursues a circuitous route, for the sake of greater
display; and on leaving the house, turns to the right. In Cairo, the
bride walks under a canopy of silk borne by four men, with one of her
near female relations on each side of her. Young unmarried girls walk
before her; these are preceded by the married ladies; and the procession
is headed and closed by a few musicians with drums and hautboys. The
bride wears a kind of pasteboard crown, or cap; and is completely veiled
from the view of spectators by a Kashmeer shawl placed over her crown
and whole person; but some handsome ornaments of the head are attached
externally. The other women are dressed in the best of their
walking-attire. In the case, however, of a bride of high rank, or of
wealth, and often in the case of one belonging to a family of the middle
class, the ladies ride upon high-saddled asses, without music or canopy;
and the bride is only distinguished by a Kashmeer shawl instead of the
usual black silk covering; one or more eunuchs sometimes riding at the
head. In the bath, after the ordinary operations of washing, &c., a
feast is made, and the party are often entertained by female singers.
Having returned in the same manner to her home, the bride's friends
there partake of a similar entertainment with her. Her hands and feet
are then stained with enna, and her eyes ornamented with kol; and her
friends give her small presents of money, and take their leave. "It is a
sunneh ordinance that the bride wash her feet in a clean vessel, and
sprinkle the water in the corners of the chamber, that a blessing may
result from this. She should also brighten her face, and put on the best
of her apparel, and adorn her eyes with kol, and stain [her hands and
feet] with enna ; and she should abstain, during
the first week, from eating anything that contains mustard, and from
vinegar, and sour apples."

The bride is conducted to the house of the bridegroom (on the following
day) in the same manner as to the bath, or with more pomp. In Cairo, the
bridal processions of persons of very high rank are conducted with
singular display. The train is usually headed by buffoons and musicians,
and a water-carrier loaded with a goat's-skin filled with sand and
water, of very great weight, which is often borne for many hours before,
as well as during, the procession, merely to amuse the spectators by
this feat of strength. Then follow (interrupted by groups of male or
female dancers, jugglers, &c.) numerous decorated open waggons, or cars,
each of which contains several members of some particular trade or art
engaged in their ordinary occupations, or one such person with
attendants: in one, for instance, a ahwejee (or ahvejee), with his
assistants and pots and cups and fire, making coffee for the
spectators: in a second, makers of sweetmeats: in a third, makers of
pancakes (faeerehs): in a fourth, silk-lace manufacturers: in a fifth,
a silk-weaver, with his loom: in a sixth, tinners of copper vessels, at
their work: in a seventh, white-washers, whitening over and over again a
wall: in short, almost every manufacture, &c., has its representatives
in a different waggon. El-Jabartee describes a procession of this kind
in which there were upwards of seventy parties of different trades and
arts, each party in a separate waggon, besides buffoons, wrestlers,
dancers, and others; followed by various officers, the eunuchs of the
bride's family, ladies of the areem with their attendants, then the
bride, in a European carriage, a troop of memlooks clad in armour, and a
Turkish band of music. It was a procession of which the like had not
before been seen.

The bride and her party, having arrived at the house, sit down to a
repast. The bridegroom does not yet see her. He has already been to the
bath, and at nightfall he goes in procession with a number of his
friends to a mosque, to perform the night-prayers; he is accompanied by
musicians and singers, or by chanters of lyric odes in praise of the
Prophet; and by men bearing cressets (poles with cylindrical frames of
iron at the top filled with flaming wood); and on his return, most of
his other attendants bear lighted wax candles, and bunches of flowers.

Returned to his house, he leaves his friends in a lower apartment, and
goes up to the bride, whom he finds seated, with a shawl thrown over her
head, so as to conceal her face completely, and attended by one or two
females. The latter he induces to retire, by means of a small present.
He then gives a present of money to the bride, as "the price of
uncovering the face," and having removed the covering (saying, as he
does so, "In the name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful"), he
beholds her, generally, for the first time. On the occasion of this
first visit, which is called the "dukhool," or "dukhleh," he is
recommended "to perfume himself, and to sprinkle some sugar and almonds
on the head of the bride and on that of each woman with her; this
practice being established by existing usage and by traditions: also,
when he approaches her, he should perform the prayers of two rek'ahs;
and she should do the same if able: then he should take hold of the hair
over her forehead, and say, 'O God, bless me in my wife, and bless my
wife in me! O God, bestow upon me  by her, and bestow upon
her  by me! O God, unite us, as Thou hast united, happily;
and separate us, when Thou separatest, happily!'"

NOTE 40. The arboosh is a woollen skull-cap, of a deep blood-red
colour, having a tassel of dark blue silk attached to the crown. It is
now worn by most Arabs of the higher and middle classes, and by many
others, except in Arabia, where it is not so common. Round it is wound
the muslin or shawl which forms the turban. Within it is worn a cotton
cap. The Turks call it "fes," and "fes."

NOTE 41. The farajeeyeh is a loose robe or coat, now generally made of
cloth, with full and long sleeves extending a little beyond the
extremities of the fingers and without any slit. It is worn chiefly by
persons of the learned professions.

NOTE 42. This is the usual mode in which money is collected for the
singing-women in the present day.

NOTE 43. "ooreeyeh" is the appellation commonly given by the Arabs to a
virgin of Paradise, by French and English writers, termed "Houri;" which
term, in Arabic, converts a female into a male, but is agreeable with
the Persian equivalent of the Arabic "ooreeyeh."

NOTE 44.--_On the Evil Eye._ Some remarks on the "evil eye" have been
made in a former note (No. 24 in the present series), with respect to
children, and the means of counteracting its supposed influence; but I
mention this subject again partly with the view of suggesting to the
reader the necessity of bearing it in mind, as it explains many usages
described, or alluded to, in this work, which would otherwise appear
unaccountable. He may remember a well-known line of Virgil--

  "Nescio quis teneros oculus mihi fascinat agnos,"

which, like many other allusions in works of ancient authors, shews how
long and how extensively this superstition has been entertained. How
deeply it is rooted in the minds of Arabs, even the most religious and
learned, may be inferred from this saying of their Prophet: "The eye has
a complete influence; because verily, if there were a thing to overcome
fate, it most certainly would be a malignant eye." Hence he
permitted charms (which he disallowed in almost every other case) to be
employed for the purpose of counteracting its influence. The
following observation, selected from several of a similar nature in my
work on the Modern Egyptians, aptly illustrates the passage to which
this note immediately refers. "It is a custom among the higher and
middle classes in Cairo, on the occasion of a marriage, to hang
chandeliers in the street before the bridegroom's house; and it often
happens that a crowd is collected to see a very large and handsome
chandelier suspended: in this case, it is a common practice to divert
the attention of the spectators by throwing down and breaking a large
jar, or by some other artifice, lest an envious eye should cause the
chandelier to fall."

NOTE 45. The closet here alluded to, being one in which ablution is
performed, always contains a small trough of water, or a ewer.

NOTE 46. This epithet, "unlucky," is often applied to an 'Efreet. I have
frequently heard it thus used by Arabs.

NOTE 47. "Aboo-Shihab" (literally, Father of a Shooting Star) is a
nickname often given to a devil, and is so employed because devils, or
evil jinnees, are sometimes destroyed by shooting stars hurled at them
by angels; an instance of which occurs in the tale under consideration.

NOTE 48. "Sitt-el-osn" signifies "the Lady of Beauty."

NOTE 49. "asheesh" is the intoxicating hemp, which has been mentioned
in former notes.

NOTE 50. Thus in the Breslau edition, and in the Calcutta edition of the
first two hundred nights; but in the edition of Cairo, the cook is
merely termed a prodigal.

NOTE 51.--_On Adoption._ The Mohammadan law allows the adoption of sons,
provided that the person to be adopted consents to the act, if of age to
judge for himself; also, that he has been deprived of his parents by
death or other means; and that there be such a difference of age between
the two parties as might subsist between a natural father and his son.
The adopted son enjoys the same right of inheritance as the natural son;
but the adoptive father is not prevented by this act from marrying any
relation of his adopted son.

NOTE 52. In the houses of Arabs of the more wealthy classes, there is
usually a chair upon which the turban is placed at night. It is of a
large size, but slight make; the bottom and back being generally of
cane-work; and sometimes it has a kind of canopy constructed over it.
The turban, when placed upon it, is covered with a kerchief of thick
silk stuff, often embroidered or interwoven with gold thread.

NOTE 53. "Moilee" may be understood as meaning either "of the fashion
of El-Moil," or "of muslin:" but the former, according to my sheykh, is
the signification here intended. I think there is nothing peculiar in
the common modern turban of El-Moil.

NOTE 54. This is done under the idea that it strengthens the infant's
eyes.

NOTE 55. "'Ajeeb" signifies "Wonderful."

NOTE 56. The meaning of this is, that he grew in a day as other children
in a month; and in a month, as others in a year.

NOTE 57. The death of the cook is mentioned in the edition of Breslau;
but not in that of Cairo.

NOTE 58. This ejaculation is generally uttered at the mention of a
deceased Muslim.

NOTE 59. "aeb" is a title given to Wezeers, as mentioned in Note 8 to
the Introduction.

NOTE 60. In the original, fifteen. The age of 'Ajeeb has been shewn to
have been little more than eleven at this period; therefore I have
substituted twelve for fifteen. In page 243 I have made a similar
correction, substituting fifteen for eighteen.

NOTE 61. This alludes to a custom common in the East,--that of giving a
present of a dress, or some article of clothing, to a person who has
brought good news.

NOTE 62. The term "boy" is not used here to imply that the eunuch was a
youth; but in the sense in which it is often employed by us; as
synonymous with "servant."

NOTE 63. "Er-Reydaneeyeh" is the name of a tract on the north of Cairo,
where travellers arriving from Syria generally halted. In the original,
by errors in the diacritical points, this name is converted into
"Ez-Zebedaneeyeh."

NOTE 64. The word which I translate "a cross," literally signifies "an
effigy;" but I suppose this term to be employed merely because a cross
bears a rude resemblance to a man with extended arms.

NOTE 65. "The name of Allah encompass thee!" (or, literally, "--be
around thee!") is an ejaculation often used, especially by women,
agreeing exactly with the expression in the first verse of the twentieth
Psalm,--"The name of the God of Jacob defend thee!"--the "name" of God
here signifying his power. "The name of the Lord is a strong tower: the
righteous runneth into it, and is safe." (Proverbs xviii. 10.)

NOTE 66. Here, for a reason given above, I have substituted "twelve" for
"ten."

NOTE 67. In the original, the last of these verses is here omitted, but
my sheykh has supplied it in the margin of my copy, and it occurs
afterwards, in the 75th night, in which the preceding verses, with some
slight variations, are repeated.

NOTE 68.--_On the Expiation of Oaths._ The law clearly allows expiation
for an inconsiderate oath, and, according to vulgar opinion, for the
violation of a deliberate oath. The expiation consists in once
feeding or clothing ten poor men, liberating a Muslim slave or captive,
or fasting three days. An unintentional oath requires no expiation; but
the swearing to a falsehood can only be expiated by deep repentance.

NOTE 69. Hole observes (page 222), that "the discovery of Bedreddin in
the Arabian Nights by the tarts he had made, bears internal evidence of
having been copied from Nella Raja's detection by the same means:" and
he refers to Kindersley's "Specimens of Indian Literature."