NOTES TO CHAPTER FIRST.

NOTE 1. The words "in a garden" are omitted in my original; but they are
required by the sequel. I may here remark, that, in future, when I find
trifling insertions of this kind to be requisite in my translation, I
shall not deem it necessary to mention them in a note.

NOTE 2. An Eastern traveller often makes a long journey with no other
encumbrance than a well-filled pair of saddle-bags: in one bag he puts
his provisions; and in the other, such articles of clothing as he may
require in addition to those in which he sets out, including a spare
shirt, and perhaps no other clean linen: for he is as indifferent with
regard to this comfort as he is careful respecting his _personal_
cleanliness.

NOTE 3. Perhaps no reader of this work will require to be told that the
date has not a _shell_. I only make this remark on account of an error
in the old translation.--As dates are very nutritious, and are preserved
by being merely dried in the sun, they are an excellent article of
provision for travellers.

NOTE 4. The merchant was culpably careless: before throwing aside the
date-stone with sufficient force to kill a Jinnee who happened to be
near him (though at the time invisible), he should have asked permission
by the exclamation "Destoor!" as explained in a note appended to the
Introduction.

NOTE 5.--_On Fate and Destiny._ The belief in fate and destiny ("el-aa
wa-l-adar") exercises a most powerful influence upon the actions and
character of the Muslims; and it is therefore highly important that the
reader of the present work should be acquainted with the notions which
these people entertain respecting such matters of faith. I use two words
(perhaps the best that our language affords) to express corresponding
Arabic terms, which some persons regard as synonymous, but others
distinguish by different shades of meaning. On what I consider the best
authority, the word which I render "fate" respects the decrees of God in
a general sense; while that which I translate "destiny" relates to the
particular applications of those decrees. In such senses these terms are
here to be understood when separately employed.

Many Muslims hold that fate is, in some respects, absolute and
unchangeable; in others, admitting of alteration; and almost all of them
_act_, in many of the affairs of life, as if this were their belief. In
the former case, it is called "el-aa el-Mokam:" in the latter,
"el-aa el-Mubram" (which term, without the explanation here given,
might be regarded as exactly synonymous with the former). Hence, the
Prophet, it is said, prayed to be preserved from the latter, as knowing
that it might be changed; and in allusion to this changeable fate, God,
we are told, says, "God will cancel what He pleaseth, and confirm;"
while, on the contrary, the fate which is termed "Mokam" is appointed
"destiny" decreed by God.

Many doctors have argued, that destiny respects only the _final state_
of a certain portion of men (believers and unbelievers); and that, in
general, man is endowed with free will, which he should exercise
according to the laws of God and his own conscience and judgment,
praying to God for a blessing on his endeavours, or imploring the
intercession of the Prophet, or of any of the saints, in his favour, and
propitiating them by offering alms or sacrifices in their names; relying
upon God for the result, which he may then, and then only, attribute to
fate or destiny. They hold, therefore, that it is criminal to attempt
resistance to the will when its dictates are conformable with the laws
of God and our natural consciences and prudence, and so passively to
await the fulfilment of God's decrees.--The doctrine of the ur-an and
the Traditions respecting the decrees of God, or fate and destiny,
appears, however, to be, that they are altogether absolute and
unchangeable,--written, in the beginning of the creation, on the
"Preserved Tablet," in heaven; that God hath predestined every event and
action, evil as well as good; at the same time commanding and approving
good, and forbidding and hating evil; and that the "cancelling"
mentioned in the preceding paragraph relates (as the context seems to
shew) to the abrogation of former scriptures, or revelations; not of
fate. But still it must be held that He hath not predestined the _will_;
though He sometimes inclines it to good, and the Devil sometimes
inclines it to evil. It is asked, then, If we have the power to will,
but not the power to perform otherwise than as God hath predetermined,
how can we be regarded as responsible beings? The answer to this is,
that our actions are judged good or evil according to our intentions, if
we have faith: good actions or intentions, it should be added, only
increase, and do not cause, our happiness, if we are believers; and evil
actions or intentions only increase our misery if we are unbelievers or
irreligious: for the Muslim holds that he is to be admitted into heaven
only by the mercy of God, on account of his faith; and to be rewarded in
proportion to his good works.

The Prophet's assertions on the subject of God's decrees are considered
of the highest importance as explanatory of the ur-an.--"Whatever is in
the universe," said he, "is by the order of God."--"God hath
pre-ordained five things on his servants; the duration of life, their
actions, their dwelling-places, their travels, and their
portions."--"There is not one among you whose sitting-place is not
written by God, whether in the fire or in paradise."--Some of the
Companions of the Prophet, on hearing the last-quoted saying, asked him,
"O Prophet, since God hath appointed our places, may we confide in this,
and abandon our religious and moral duties?" He answered, "No: because
the happy will do good works, and those who are of the miserable will do
bad works."--The following of his sayings further illustrate this
subject.--"When God hath ordered a creature to die in any particular
place, He causeth his wants to direct him to that place."--A Companion
asked, "O Prophet of God, inform me respecting charms, and the medicines
which I swallow, and shields which I make use of for protection, whether
they prevent any of the orders of God." Moammad answered, "These also
are by the order of God." "There is a medicine for every pain:
then, when the medicine reaches the pain, it is cured by the order of
God."--When a Muslim, therefore, feels an inclination to make use
of medicine for the cure of a disease, he should do so, in the hope of
its being predestined that he shall be so cured.

On the predestination of diseases, I find the following curious
quotation and remark in a manuscript work, by Es-Suyooee, in my
possession.--"El-aleemee says, 'Communicable or contagious diseases are
six: small-pox, measles, itch or scab, foul breath or putridity,
melancholy, and pestilential maladies; and diseases engendered are also
six: leprosy, hectic, epilepsy, gout, elephantiasis, and phthisis.' But
this does not contradict the saying of the Prophet, 'There is no
transition of diseases by contagion or infection, nor any omen that
brings evil:' for the transition here meant is one occasioned by the
disease itself; whereas the effect is of God, who causes pestilence to
spread when there is intercourse with the diseased."--A Bedawee
asked the Prophet, "What is the condition of camels which stay in the
deserts? verily, you might say, they are deer, in health and in
cleanness of skin; then they mix with mangy camels, and they become
mangy also." Moammad said, "What made the first camel mangy?"

Notwithstanding, however, the arguments which have been here adduced,
and many others that might be added, declaring or implying the
unchangeable nature of all God's decrees, I have found it to be the
opinion of my own Muslim friends, that God may be induced, by
supplication, to change certain of his decrees; at least, those
regarding degrees of happiness or misery in this world and the next; and
that such is the general opinion, appears from a form of prayer which is
repeated in the mosques on the eve of the middle (or fifteenth day) of
the month of Shaaban; when it is believed that such portions of God's
decrees as constitute the destinies of all living creatures for the
ensuing year, are confirmed and fixed. In this prayer it is said, "O
God, if Thou _hast recorded_ me in thine abode, upon 'the Original of
the Book' , miserable, or unfortunate, or scanted
in my sustenance, _cancel_, O God, of thy goodness, my misery, and
misfortune, and scanty allowance of sustenance, and confirm me, in thine
abode, upon the Original of the Book, as happy, and provided for, and
directed to good," &c.

The Arabs in general constantly have recourse both to charms and
medicines, not only for the cure, but also for the prevention of
diseases. They have, indeed, a strange passion for medicine, which shows
that they do not consider fate as altogether unconditional. Nothing can
exceed the earnestness with which they often press a European traveller
for a dose; and the more violent the remedy, the better are they
pleased. The following case will serve as an example:--Three
donkey-drivers, conveying the luggage of two British travellers from
Boola to Cairo, opened a bottle which they observed in a basket, and
finding it to contain, as they had suspected, brandy, emptied it down
their throats: but he who had the last, on turning up the bottle, got
the tail of a scorpion into his mouth; and, looking through the bottle,
to his great horror, saw that it contained a number of these reptiles,
with tarantulas, vipers, and beetles. Thinking that they had poisoned
themselves, but not liking to rely upon fate, they persuaded a man to
come to me for medicine. He introduced the subject by saying, "O
Efendee, do an act of kindness: there are three men poisoned; in your
mercy give them medicine, and save their lives:" and then he related the
whole affair, without concealing the theft. I replied, that they did not
deserve medicine; but he urged that, by giving it, I should obtain an
immense reward. "Yes," said I; "'he who saveth a soul alive shall be as
if he had saved the lives of all mankind.'" I said this to try the
feeling of the applicant, who, expressing admiration of my knowledge,
urged me to be quick, lest the men should die; thus showing himself to
be no unconditional fatalist. I gave him three strong doses of tartar
emetic; and he soon came back to thank me, saying that the medicine was
most admirable, for the men had hardly swallowed it, when they almost
vomited their hearts and livers, and everything else in their bodies.

From a distrust in faith, some Muslims even shut themselves up during
the prevalence of plague; but this practice is generally condemned. A
Syrian friend of mine, who did so, nearly had his door broken open by
his neighbours. Another of my friends, one of the most distinguished of
the 'Ulama, confessed to me his conviction of the lawfulness of
quarantine, and argued well in favour of it; but said that he dared not
openly avow such an opinion. "The Apostle of God," said he, "God bless
and save him! hath commanded that we should not enter a city where there
is pestilence, nor go out from it. Why did he say, 'Enter it
not?'--because, by so doing, we should expose ourselves to the disease.
Why did he say, 'Go not out from it?'--because, by so doing, we should
carry the disease to others. The Prophet was tenderly considerate of our
welfare: but the present Muslims in general are like bulls [brute
beasts]; and they hold the meaning of this command to be, Go not into a
city where there is pestilence, because this would be rashness; and go
not out from it, because this would be distrusting God's power to save
you from it."

Many of the vulgar and ignorant among modern Muslims, believe that the
unchangeable destinies of every man are written upon his head, in what
are termed the sutures of the skull.

NOTE 6. The paragraph thus commencing, and the verses comprised in it,
are translated from the Calcutta edition of the first two hundred
nights.

NOTE 7. It is a common custom for a Muslim, on a military expedition, or
during a long journey, especially in the desert, to carry his
grave-linen with him; for he is extremely careful that he may be buried
according to the law. It seems to be implied in our tale, that the
merchant hoped that the Jinnee, or some passing traveller, would wash,
shroud, and bury him.

NOTE 8. It is thus that the Arab women generally do on the occasion of a
funeral.

NOTE 9.--_On the title of_ Sheykh. "Sheykh" is an appellation which
literally signifies "an elder," or "an aged person," and in this sense
it is here used; but it is also commonly employed as synonymous with our
appellation of "Mister;" and particularly applied to a learned man, or a
reputed saint. In every case, it is a title of respect, and never given
to any but a Muslim.

NOTE 10. "Jann" is here used as synonymous with "Jinn."

NOTE 11. A cousin (the daughter of a paternal uncle) is often chosen as
a wife, on account of the tie of blood, which is likely to attach her
more strongly to her husband; or on account of an affection conceived in
early years. The various customs relating to marriage, I shall describe
on a future occasion.

NOTE 12. A bride is called young, by the Arabs, when she is about twelve
years of age. In the Calcutta edition of the first two hundred nights,
the wife in this tale is said to have been of this age when she was
first married.

NOTE 13.--_On Slaves._ A slave, among Muslims, is either a person taken
captive in war, or carried off by force, and being at the time of
capture an infidel; or the offspring of a female slave by another slave,
or by any man who is not her owner, or by her owner, if he does not
acknowledge himself to be the father: but the offspring of a male slave
by a free woman is free. A person who embraces the Mohammadan faith
after having been made a slave, does not by this act become free, unless
he flees from a foreign infidel master to a Muslim country, and there
becomes a Mohammadan. A person cannot have as a slave one whom he
acknowledges to be within the prohibited degrees of marriage.--The
slaves of the Arabs are mostly from Abyssinia and the Negro countries: a
few, mostly in the houses of wealthy individuals, are from Georgia and
Circassia.

Slaves have no civil liberty; but are entirely under the authority of
their owners, whatever may be the religion, sex, or age, of the latter;
and can possess no property, unless by the owner's permission. The owner
is entire master, while he pleases, of the person and goods of his
slave; and of the offspring of his female slave, which, if begotten by
him or presumed to be so, he may recognise as his own legitimate child,
or not: the child, if recognised by him, enjoys the same privileges as
the offspring of a free wife; and if not recognised by him, is his
slave. The master may even kill his own slave with impunity for any
offence; and he incurs but a slight punishment (as imprisonment for a
period at the discretion of the judge) if he kills him wantonly. He may
give away or sell his slaves, excepting in some cases which will be
mentioned; and may marry them to whom he will, but not separate them
when married. A slave, however, according to most of the doctors, cannot
have more than two wives at the same time. Unemancipated slaves, at the
death of their master, become the property of his heirs; and when an
emancipated slave dies, leaving no male descendants or collateral
relations, the former master is the heir; or, if he be dead, his heirs
inherit the slave's property. As a slave enjoys less advantages than a
free person, the law, in some cases, ordains that his punishment for an
offence shall be half of that to which the free is liable to the same
offence, or even less than half: if it be a fine, or pecuniary
compensation, it must be paid by the owner, to the amount, if necessary,
of the value of the slave, or the slave must be given in compensation.

The owner, but not the part-owner, may cohabit with any of his female
slaves who is a Mohammadan, a Christian, or a Jewess, if he has not
married her to another man; but not with two or more who are sisters, or
who are related to each other in any of the degrees which would prevent
their both being his wives at the same time if they were free: after
having so lived with one, he must entirely relinquish such intercourse
with her before he can do the same with another who is so related to
her. He cannot have this intercourse with a pagan slave. A Christian or
Jew may have slaves, but not enjoy the privilege above mentioned with
one who is a Mohammadan. The master must wait a certain period
(generally from a month to three months) after the acquisition of a
female slave, before he can have such intercourse with her. If he find
any fault in her within three days, he is usually allowed to return her.

When a man, from being the husband, becomes the master, of a slave, the
marriage is dissolved, and he cannot continue to live with her but as
her master, enjoying, however, all a master's privileges; unless he
emancipates her; in which case he may again take her as his wife with
her consent. In like manner, when a woman, from being the wife, becomes
the possessor, of a slave, the marriage is dissolved, and cannot be
renewed unless she emancipates him, and he consents to the re-union.

Complete and immediate emancipation is sometimes granted to a slave
gratuitously, or for a future pecuniary compensation. It is conferred by
means of a written document, or by a verbal declaration (expressed in
the words, "Thou art free," or some similar phrase) in the presence of
two witnesses, or by returning the certificate of sale obtained from the
former owner. Future emancipation is sometimes covenanted to be granted
on the fulfilment of certain conditions; and more frequently, to be
conferred on the occasion of the owner's death. In the latter case, the
owner cannot sell the slave to whom he has made this promise: and, as he
cannot alienate by will more than one-third of the whole property that
he leaves, the law ordains that, if the value of the said slave exceeds
that portion, the slave must obtain and pay the additional sum. When a
female slave has borne a child to her master, and he acknowledges the
child to be his own, he cannot sell this slave, and she becomes free on
his death.

Abyssinian and white female slaves are kept by many men of the middle
and higher classes, and often instead of wives, as requiring less
expense, and being more subservient; but they are generally indulged
with the same luxuries as free ladies; their vanity is gratified by
costly dresses and ornaments, and they rank high above free servants; as
do also the male slaves. Those called Abyssinians appear to be a mixed
race between negroes and whites; and are from the territories of the
Gallas. They are mostly kidnapped and sold by their own countrymen. The
negro female slaves, as few of them have considerable personal
attractions (which is not the case with the Abyssinians, many of whom
are very beautiful), are usually employed only in cooking, and other
menial offices. The female slaves of the higher classes are often
instructed in plain needlework and embroidery, and sometimes in music
and dancing. Formerly, many of them possessed sufficient literary
accomplishments to quote largely from esteemed poems, or even to compose
extemporary verses, which they would often accompany with the lute. The
condition of many concubine slaves is happy; and that of many, quite the
contrary. These, and all other slaves of either sex, are generally
treated with kindness; but at first they are usually importuned, and not
unfrequently used with much harshness, to induce them to embrace the
Mohammadan faith; which almost all of them do. Their services are
commonly light: the usual office of the male white slave, who is called
"memlook," is that of a page, or a military guard. Eunuchs are employed
as guardians of the women; but only in the houses of men of high rank,
or of great wealth: on account of the important and confidential office
which they fill, they are generally treated in public with especial
consideration. I used to remark, in Cairo, that few persons saluted me
with a more dignified and consequential air than these pitiable but
self-conceited beings. Most of them are Abyssinians or Negroes. Indeed,
the slaves in general take too much advantage of the countenance of
their masters, especially when they belong to men in power. The master
is bound to afford his slaves proper food and clothing, or to let them
work for their own support, or to sell, give away, or liberate them. It
is, however, considered disgraceful for him to sell a slave who has been
long in his possession; and it seldom happens that a master emancipates
a female slave, without marrying her to some man able to support her, or
otherwise providing for her.

The Prophet strongly enjoined the duty of kindness to slaves. "Feed your
memlooks," said he, "with food of that which ye eat, and clothe them
with such clothing as ye wear; and command them not to do that which
they are unable."--These precepts are generally attended to, either
entirely or in a great degree. Some other sayings of the Prophet on this
subject well deserve to be mentioned; as the following:--"He who beats
his slave without fault, or slaps him on the face, his atonement for
this is freeing him."--"A man who behaves ill to his slave will not
enter into paradise."--"Whoever is the cause of separation between
mother and child, by selling or giving, God will separate him from his
friends on the day of resurrection."--"When a slave wishes well to his
master, and worships God well, for him are double rewards."--It is
related of 'Othman, "that he twisted the ear of a memlook belonging to
him, on account of disobedience, and afterwards, repenting of it,
ordered him to twist _his_ ear in like manner: but he would not. 'Othman
urged him, and the memlook advanced, and began to wring it by little and
little. He said to him, 'Wring it hard; for I cannot endure the
punishment of the day of judgment .' The memlook
answered, 'O my master, the day that thou fearest, I also fear.'"--"It
is related also of Zeyn-el-'Abideen, that he had a memlook who seized a
sheep, and broke its leg; and he said to him, 'Why didst thou this?' He
answered, 'To provoke thee to anger.' 'And I,' said he, 'will provoke to
anger him who taught thee; and he is Iblees: go, and be free, for the
sake of God.'"--Many similar anecdotes might be added; but the
general assertions of travellers in the East are more satisfactory
evidence in favour of the humane conduct of most Muslims to their
slaves.

It sometimes happens, though rarely, that free girls are sold as
slaves. A remarkable instance is related in the "Mir-at
ez-Zeman."--Faimeh, surnamed Ghareeb, a slave of the Khaleefeh
El-Moataim, the son of Haroon, was a poetess, accomplished in singing
and calligraphy, and extremely beautiful. Her mother was an orphan; and
Jaafar, the famous Wezeer of Haroon Er-Rasheed, took her as his wife;
but his father, Yaya, reproached him for marrying a woman whose father
and mother were unknown, and he therefore removed her from his own
residence to a neighbouring house, where he frequently visited her; and
she bore him a daughter, the above-mentioned Ghareeb, and died. Jaafar
committed her infant to the care of a Christian woman, to nurse; and, on
the overthrow of his family, this woman sold her young charge as a
slave. El-Emeen, the successor of Er-Rasheed, bought her of a man named
Sumbul, but never paid her price; and when he was killed, she returned
to her former master; but on the arrival of El-Ma-moon at Baghdad, she
was described to him, and he compelled Sumbul to sell her to him. This
Sumbul loved her so passionately, that he died of grief at her loss. On
the death of El-Ma-moon, his successor, El-Moataim, bought her for a
hundred thousand dirhems, and emancipated her. The historian adds, that
she composed several well-known airs and verses.

NOTE 14. An Arab who is married to his cousin generally calls her by
this appellation rather than that of wife, as the tie of blood is, to
him, in every respect, stronger than that of matrimony.

NOTE 15.--_On Magic._ The Arabs and other Mohammadans enjoy a remarkable
advantage over _us_ in the composition of works of fiction: in the
invention of incidents which _we_ should regard as absurd in the
extreme, _they_ cannot be accused by their countrymen of exceeding the
bounds of probability. A case similar to that here described was related
to me as a fact, in Cairo. A person in that city, I was told, was
suddenly surprised by the disappearance of his brother, and by finding,
in his place, an ass: but this animal increased his astonishment, and
that of every person who beheld him, by manifesting a sagacity
singularly opposed to the proverbial dulness of the generality of his
species. Yet, strange as it may seem, it was not imagined that this
brute was the lost man in a transformed state, till, one day, an old
woman, seeing him, quickly covered her face, and declared the fact. She
discovered this by her knowledge of magic; and, by her skill in this
art, she agreed to restore the enchanted person to his proper shape.
Having collected a number of herbs, she boiled them in a large vessel;
and when the decoction had cooled, she took the vessel, and, muttering a
certain spell, threw its contents over the animal, endeavouring to do so
in such a manner that every part of it should be wetted. Every part of
it _was_ wetted, excepting one hind-foot; and, accordingly, it was
restored to the original human form, with the exception of one foot,
which remained like that of an ass.

An implicit belief in magic is entertained by almost all Muslims; and
he, among them, who denies its truth, they regard as a freethinker, or
an infidel. Some are of opinion that it ceased on the mission of
Moammad; but these are comparatively few. Many of the most learned
Muslims, to the present age, have deeply studied it; and a much greater
number of persons of inferior education (particularly school-masters)
have, more or less, devoted their time and talents to the pursuit of
this knowledge. Recourse is had to it for the discovery of hidden
treasures, for alchymical purposes, for the acquisition of the knowledge
of futurity, to procure offspring, to obtain the affection of a beloved
object, to effect cures, to guard against the influence of the evil eye,
to afflict or kill an enemy or a rival, and to attain various other
objects of desire.

There are two descriptions of magic; one is spiritual, and regarded by
all but freethinkers as true; the other, natural, and denounced by the
more religious and enlightened as deceptive.

chiefly depends upon the virtues of certain names of God, and passages
from the ur-an, and the agency of Angels and Jinn, or Genii. It is of
two kinds: High and Low ("'Ilwee" and "Suflee"), or Divine and Satanic
("Ramanee," _i. e._ relating to "the Compassionate" , and
"Sheyanee").

1. Divine magic is regarded as a sublime science, and is studied only by
good men, and practised only for good purposes. Perfection in this
branch of magic consists in the knowledge of "the most great name" of
God ("el-Ism el Aaam"); but this knowledge is imparted to none but the
peculiar favourites of Heaven. By virtue of this name, which was
engraved on his seal-ring, Suleyman (or Solomon) subjected to his
dominion the Jinn and the birds and the winds, as mentioned in a former
note. By pronouncing it, his minister Aaf, also, transported, in an
instant, to the presence of his sovereign, in Jerusalem, the throne of
the Queen of Sheba. But this was a small miracle to effect by such
means; for, by uttering this name, a man may even raise the dead. Other
names of the Deity, commonly known, are believed to have particular
efficacies when uttered or written; as also are the names of the
Prophet; and Angels and good Jinn are said to be rendered subservient to
the purposes of divine magic by means of certain invocations. Of such
names and invocations, together with words unintelligible to the
uninitiated in this science, passages from the ur-an, mysterious
combinations of numbers, and peculiar diagrams and figures, are chiefly
composed written charms employed for good purposes. Enchantment, when
used for benevolent purposes, is regarded by the vulgar as a branch of
lawful or divine magic; but not so by the learned; and the same remark
applies to the science of divination.

2. Satanic magic, as its name implies, is a science depending on the
agency of the Devil and the inferior evil Jinn, whose services are
obtained by means similar to those which propitiate, or render
subservient, the good Jinn. It is condemned by the Prophet and all good
Muslims, and only practised for bad purposes.--Enchantment, which is
termed "es-Ser," is almost universally acknowledged to be a branch of
satanic magic; but some few persons assert (agreeably with several tales
in this work), that it _may_ be, and by some _has_ been, studied with
good intentions, and practised by the aid of good Jinn; consequently,
that there is such a science as _good_ enchantment, which is to be
regarded as a branch of _divine_ or _lawful_ magic. The metamorphoses
are said to be generally effected by means of spells, or invocations to
Jinn, accompanied by the sprinkling of water or dust, &c., on the object
to be transformed. Persons are said to be enchanted in various ways:
some, paralyzed, or even deprived of life; others, affected with
irresistible passion for certain objects; others, again, rendered
demoniacs; and some, transformed into brutes, birds, &c. The evil eye is
believed to enchant in a very powerful and distressing manner. This was
acknowledged even by the Prophet. Diseases and death are often
attributed to its influence. Amulets, which are mostly written charms,
of the kind above described, are worn by many Muslims with the view of
counteracting, or preserving from, enchantment; and for the same
purpose, many ridiculous ceremonies are practised.--Divination, which is
termed "el-Kihaneh," is pronounced, on the highest authority, to be a
branch of satanic magic; though not believed to be so by all Muslims.
According to an assertion of the Prophet, what a fortune-teller says may
sometimes be true; because one of the Jinn steals away the truth, and
carries it to the magician's ear: for the Angels come down to the region
next the earth (the lowest heaven), and mention the works that have been
pre-ordained in heaven; and the Devils (or evil Jinn) listen to what the
Angels say, and hear the orders predestined in heaven, and carry them to
the fortune-tellers. It is on such occasions that shooting-stars are
hurled at the Devils. It is said that "the diviner obtains the
services of the Sheyan by magic arts, and by names , and by
the burning of perfumes, and he informs him of secret things: for the
Devils, before the mission of the Apostle of God," it is added, "used to
ascend to heaven, and hear words by stealth." That the evil Jinn
are believed still to ascend sufficiently near to the lowest heaven to
hear the conversation of the Angels, and so to assist magicians, appears
from the former quotation, and is asserted by all Muslims. The discovery
of hidden treasures, before alluded to, is one of the objects for which
divination is most studied.--The mode of divination called "arb
el-Mendel" is by some supposed to be effected by the aid of evil Jinn;
but the more enlightened of the Muslims regard it as a branch of natural
magic. Some curious performances of this kind, by means of a fluid
mirror of ink, have been described in my "Account of the Manners and
Customs of the Modern Egyptians," and in No. 117 of the "Quarterly
Review."

There are certain modes of divination which cannot properly be classed
under the head of spiritual magic, but require a place between the
account of this science and that of natural magic.--The most important
of these branches of Kihaneh is Astrology, which is called "'Ilm
en-Nujoom." This is studied by many Muslims in the present day; and its
professors are often employed by the Arabs to determine a fortunate
period for laying the foundation of a building, commencing a journey,
&c.; but more frequently by the Persians and Turks. The Prophet
pronounced astrology to be a branch of magic.--Another branch of
Kihaneh is Geomancy, called "arb er-Raml;" a mode of divination from
certain marks made on sand (whence its appellation), or on paper; and
said to be chiefly founded on astrology.--The science called "ez-Zijr,"
or "el-'Eyafeh," is a third branch of Kihaneh; being divination or
auguration chiefly from the motions and positions, or postures, of
birds, or of gazelles and other beasts of the chase. Thus, what was
termed a "Sane," that is, such an animal standing or passing with its
right side towards the spectator, was esteemed among the Arabs as of
good omen; and a "Bare," or an animal of this kind with its left side
towards the spectator, was held as inauspicious.--"El-iyafeh,"
under which term are included Chiromancy and its kindred sciences, is a
fourth branch of Kihaneh.--"Et-Tefa-ul," or the taking an omen,
particularly a good one, from a name or words accidentally heard or
seen, or chosen from a book, belongs to the same science. The taking a
"fal," or omen, from the ur-an is generally held to be lawful.--Various
trifling events are considered as ominous. For instance, a Sulan
quitting his palace with his troops, a standard happened to strike a
"thureiya" (a cluster of lamps, so called from resembling the Pleiades),
and broke them: he drew from this an evil omen, and would have
relinquished the expedition; but one of his chief officers said
to him, "O our lord, thy standards have reached the Pleiades;"--and,
being relieved by this remark, he proceeded, and returned
victorious.--The interpretation of dreams, "Taabeer el-Menamat,"
must also be classed among the branches of this science. According to
the Prophet, it is the only branch of divination worthy of dependance.
"Good dreams," said he, "are one of the parts of prophecy," and "nothing
else of prophecy remains." "Good dreams are from God; and false dreams,
from the Devil." "When any one of you has a bad dream, spit three times
over your left shoulder, and seek protection with God from the Devil
thrice; and turn from the side on which the dream was, to the
other." This rule is observed by many Muslims. Dreams are generally
so fully relied upon by them as to be sometimes the means of deciding
contested points in history and science. The sight, in a dream, of
anything green or white, or of water, is considered auspicious; anything
black or red, or fire, inauspicious.--The distinction of fortunate and
unfortunate days should also here be mentioned. Thursday and Friday,
especially the latter, are considered fortunate; Monday and Wednesday,
doubtful; Sunday, Tuesday, and Saturday, especially the last,
unfortunate. It is said that there are seven evil days in every 
month; namely, the third, on which abeel (or Cain) killed Habeel
(Abel); the fifth, on which God cast down Adam from paradise, and
afflicted the people of Yoonus (Jonas), and on which Yoosuf (or Joseph)
was cast into the well; the thirteenth, on which God took away the
wealth of Eiyoob (or Job), and afflicted him, and took away the kingdom
from Suleyman (or Solomon), and on which the Jews killed the prophets;
the sixteenth, on which God exterminated and buried the people of Loo
(or Lot), and transformed three hundred Christians into swine, and Jews
into apes, and on which the Jews sawed asunder Zekereeya (or Zachariah);
the twenty-first, on which Pharaoh was born, and on which he was
drowned, and on which his nation was afflicted with the plagues; the
twenty-fourth, on which Numrood (or Nimrod) killed seventy women,
and cast El-Khaleel (or Abraham) into the fire, and on which was
slaughtered the camel of ale; and the twenty-fifth, on which the
suffocating wind was sent upon the people of Hood.

persons of the more enlightened classes of Muslims as altogether a
deceptive art, no more worthy of respect than legerdemain; but it seems
to be nearly allied to enchantment; for it is said to effect, in
appearance, the most wonderful transformations, and to cause the most
extraordinary visions; affecting the senses and imagination in a manner
similar to opium. This and other drugs are supposed, by some persons, to
be the chief means by which such illusions are caused; and perfumes,
which are generally burnt in these performances, may operate in a
similar manner. As such things are employed in performances of the kind
called "arb el-Mendel," before mentioned, these feats are regarded by
many as effected by natural magic, notwithstanding what has been said
above respecting the services of evil Jinn being procured by means of
perfumes.--Alchymy ("el-Keemiya") is a branch of natural magic. It is
studied by many Muslims of the present day, and by some of considerable
talents and attainments.

The most celebrated of the magicians who have gained notoriety in Egypt
during the course of the last hundred years, was the sheykh Amad
adoomeh, who flourished somewhat more than sixty years ago--I write in
1837. Several persons of Cairo, men of intelligence and of good
education, have related to me various most marvellous stories of his
performances, on the authority of eye-witnesses whom they considered
veracious; but a more credible account of this magician I have found in
the work of an excellent historian of Modern Egypt. This author mentions
the sheykh adoomeh as an aged man, of venerable appearance, who derived
his origin from the town of Semennood, in the Delta, and who acquired a
very great and extensive celebrity for his attainments in spiritual and
natural magic, and for holding converse, face to face, with Jinn, and
causing them to appear to other persons, even to the blind, as men
acquainted with him informed the historian. His contemporaries, says
this writer, entertained various opinions respecting him; but, among
them, a famous grammarian and general scholar, the sheykh asan
El-Kafrawee, regarded him as a first-rate saint, who performed evident
miracles; this learned man pronouncing as such the effects of "his
legerdemain and natural magic." His fame he describes as having
increased until he was induced to try an unlucky experiment. A Memlook
chief, Yoosuf Bey, saw some magic characters written on the body of one
of his female slaves, and, exasperated by jealousy, commanded her, with
a threat of instant death, to tell him who had done this. She confessed
that a woman had taken her to the sheykh adoomeh, and that he had
written this charm to attract to her the Bey's love. Upon hearing this,
he instantly sent some attendants to seize the magician, and to put him
to death, and throw him into the Nile; which was done. But the
manner in which the seizure was made, as related to me by one of my
friends, deserves to be mentioned. Several persons, one after another,
endeavoured to lay hold upon him; but every arm that was stretched forth
for this purpose was instantly paralyzed, through a spell muttered by
the magician; until a man behind him thrust a gag into his mouth, and so
stopped his enchantments.

Of the stories related to me of adoomeh's miracles, the following will
serve as a specimen:--In order to give one of his friends a treat, he
took him to the distance of about half an hour's walk into the desert on
the north of Cairo; here they both sat down, upon the pebbly and sandy
plain, and, the magician having uttered a spell, they suddenly found
themselves in the midst of a garden, like one of the gardens of
paradise, abounding with flowers and fruit-trees of every kind,
springing up from a soil clothed with verdure brilliant as the emerald,
and irrigated by numerous streamlets of the clearest water. A repast of
the most delicious viands and fruits and wines was spread before them by
invisible hands; and they both ate to satiety, taking copious draughts
of the various wines. At length, the magician's guest sank into a deep
sleep; and when he awoke, he found himself again in the pebbly and sandy
plain, with adoomeh still by his side.--The reader will probably
attribute this vision to a dose of opium or some similar drug; and such
I suppose to have been the means employed; for I cannot doubt the
integrity of the narrator, though he would not admit such an
explanation; regarding the whole as an affair of magic, effected by the
operation of Jinn, like similar relations in the present work.

It may be remarked that most of the enchantments described in this work
are said to be performed by _women_; and reputed _witches_ appear to
have been much more numerous in all countries than _wizards_. This fact
the Muslims readily explain by a saying of their Prophet:--That women
are deficient in sense and religion:--whence they argue that they are
more inclined than men to practise what is unlawful.

NOTE 16.--_On the Two Grand Festivals._ The Muslims observe two grand
'Eeds, or Festivals, in every year. The first of these immediately
follows Ramaan, the month of abstinence, and lasts three days: it is
called the Minor Festival. The other, which is called the Great
Festival, commences on the tenth of Zu-l-ejjeh, the day when the
pilgrims, halting on their return from Mount 'Arafat to Mekkeh, in the
Valley of Mine (vulgarly called Muna), perform their sacrifice: the
observance of this festival also continues three days, or four.

Early in the first morning, on each of these festivals, the Muslim is
required to perform a lustration of his whole person, as on the mornings
of Friday; and on the first morning of the Minor Festival, he should
break his fast with a few dates or some other light food; but on the
Great Festival, he abstains from food until he has acquitted himself of
the religious duties now to be mentioned. Soon after sunrise, on the
first day of each festival, the men, dressed in new or in their best
clothes, repair to the mosque, or to a particular place appointed for
the performance of the prayers of the 'Eed. On going thither, they
should repeat, frequently, "God is most great!"--this, on the Minor
Festival, they should do inaudibly: on the other, aloud. The
congregation, having assembled, repeat the prayers of two rek'ahs; after
which, the Khaeeb recites a khubeh; _i. e._ an exhortation and a
prayer. On each of these festivals, in the mosque, or place of prayer,
and in the street, and at each other's houses, friends congratulate and
embrace one another; generally paying visits for this purpose; and the
great receive visits from their dependants. The young, on these
occasions, kiss the right hand of the aged; and servants or dependants
do the same to their masters or superiors, unless the latter be of high
rank, in which case they kiss the end of the hanging sleeve, or the
skirt of the outer garment. Most of the shops are closed, excepting
those at which eatables and sweet drinks are sold; but the streets are
filled with people in their holiday clothes.

On the Minor Festival, which, as it terminates an arduous fast, is
celebrated with more rejoicing than the other, servants and other
dependants receive presents of new articles of clothing from their
masters or patrons; and the servant receives presents of small sums of
money from his master's friends, whom, if they do not visit his master,
he goes to congratulate; as well as from any former master, to whom he
often takes a plateful of kaks. These are sweet cakes, or biscuits, of
an annular form, composed of flour and butter, with a little 'ajameeyeh
(which is a thick paste consisting of butter, honey, a little flour, and
some spices) inside. They are also often sent as presents on this
occasion by other people. Another custom required of the faithful on
this festival is the giving of alms.

On the Great Festival, after the prayers of the congregation, every one
who can afford it performs, with his own hand, or by that of a deputy, a
sacrifice of a ram, he-goat, cow or buffalo, or she-camel; part of the
meat of which he eats, and part he gives to the poor, or to his friends
or dependants. The ram or goat should be at least one year old; the cow
or buffalo, two years; and the camel, five years; and the victim should
not have any considerable mutilation or infirmity. A cow or buffalo, or
a camel, is a sufficient sacrifice for seven persons. The clothes which
were put on new at the former festival are generally worn on this
occasion; and the presents which are given to servants and others are
usually somewhat less.

On each of the two festivals it is also customary, especially with the
women, to visit the tombs of relations. The party generally take with
them a palm-branch, and place it, broken in several pieces, or merely
its leaves, upon the tomb or monument; or some, instead of this, place
sweet basil or other flowers. They also usually provide themselves with
sweet cakes, bread, dates, or some other kind of food, to distribute to
the poor. But their first duty, on arriving at the tomb, is to recite
the Fateah (the opening Chapter of the ur-an), or to employ a person
to recite previously a longer chapter; generally the thirty-sixth (or
Soorat Ya-Seen); or even the whole of the book: or sometimes the
visiters recite the Fateah, and, after having hired a person to perform
a longer recitation, go away before he commences. The women often stay
all the days of the festival in the cemeteries, either in tents, or in
houses of their own, erected there for their reception on these and
other occasions. The tent of each party surrounds the tomb which is the
object of their visit. In the outskirts of the cemeteries, swings and
whirligigs are erected; and story-tellers, dancers, and jugglers, amuse
the populace.

NOTE 17.--_On the Mode of Slaughtering of Animals for Food._ In the old
translation, the sheykh is described as preparing to slaughter the cow
with a _mallet_. This is a mistake of a serious nature; as the flesh of
the victim, if so killed, would be legally unclean. The Muslims are
required to slaughter animals for food in a particular manner. Sheep,
goats, cows or bulls, and buffaloes, must be killed by cutting the
throat, at the part next the head, or any other part; dividing the
windpipe, gullet, and carotid arteries. The camel is to be slaughtered
by _stabbing_ the throat at the part next the breast. Poultry, also,
must be killed by cutting the throat; and so must every tame animal of
which the flesh is lawful food. The slaughterer, in every case, must be
a Muslim, a Christian, or a Jew; of either sex. On commencing the
operation, he must say, "In the name of God! God is most great!"--or at
least, "In the name of God!"--but not add, "the Compassionate, the
Merciful"--for an obvious reason. Birds or beasts of the chase may be
killed by an arrow, a dog, a hawk, &c.; but the name of God must be
uttered at the time of discharging the arrow, or slipping the dog, &c.
When the beast or bird is not killed at once by the arrow, &c., it must
be slaughtered as soon as possible, in the same manner as sheep and
poultry: the law, as well as humanity, requires this.

NOTE 18.--_On the Influence of Eloquence and Tales upon the Arabs._ The
main incident upon which this work is founded, the triumph of the
fascination of the tongue over a cruel and unjust determination which
nothing else could annul, might be regarded, by persons unacquainted
with the character and literature of the Arabs, as a contrivance too
improbable in its nature; but such is not the case. Perhaps there are no
other people in the world who are such enthusiastic admirers of
literature, and so excited by romantic tales, as those above named.
Eloquence, with them, is lawful magic: it exercises over their minds an
irresistible influence. "I swear by God," said their Prophet, "verily
abuse of infidels in verse is worse to them than arrows." This, of
course, alludes to _Arab_ unbelievers.

In the purest, or Heroic Age of Arabic literature, which was anterior to
the triumph of the Mohammadan religion, the conquest which the love of
eloquence could achieve over the sanguinary and vindictive feelings of
the Arabs was most remarkably exemplified in the annual twenty days'
fair of 'Oka, or 'Okah. Respecting this fair, I shall here insert a
few particulars borrowed from an author who is at present devoting
talents of the very highest order to the study and illustration of the
history and literature of the early Arabs, and to whose conversation and
writings I must acknowledge myself indebted for most valuable
information, which will often be of great utility to me in this
undertaking, as well as in every branch of my Arabic studies.

The fair of 'Oka "was not only a great mart opened annually to all the
tribes of Arabia; but it was also a literary congress, or rather a
general concourse of virtues, of glory and of poetry, whither the
hero-poets resorted to celebrate their exploits in rhyming verse, and
peacefully to contend for every kind of honour. This fair was held in
the district of Mekkeh, between E-aif and Nakhleh, and was opened at
the new moon of Zu-l-aadeh; that is to say, at the commencement of a
period of three sacred months, during which all war was suspended, and
homicide interdicted.... How is it possible to conceive that men whose
wounds were always bleeding, who had always acts of vengeance to
execute, vengeances to dread, could at a certain epoch impose silence
upon their animosities, so as tranquilly to sit by a mortal enemy? How
could the brave who required the blood of a father, a brother, or a son,
according to the phraseology of the desert and of the Bible, who
long, perhaps, had pursued in vain the murderer,--meet him, accost him
peacefully at 'Oka, and only assault with cadences and rhymes him whose
presence alone seemed to accuse him of impotence or cowardice,--him whom
he was bound to slay, under pain of infamy, after the expiration of the
truce? In fine, how could he hear a panegyric celebrating a glory
acquired at his own expense, and sustain the fire of a thousand looks,
and yet appear unmoved? Had the Arabs no longer any blood in their veins
during the continuance of the fair?--These questions, so
embarrassing, ... were determined , during the age of
Arab paganism, in a manner the most simple and most refined.--At the
fair of 'Oka, the heroes were masked .--In the recitations
and improvisations, the voice of the orator was aided by that of a
rhapsodist or crier, who was stationed near him, and repeated his words.
There is a similar office in the public prayers: it is that of the
muballigh (transmitter), who is employed to repeat in a loud voice what
is said in a lower tone by the Imam. These two facts have been revealed
to me by the same manuscript which I am translating, and upon which I am
commenting. The use of the mask  might, however, be either
adopted or dispensed with, _ad libitum_; as is proved by the narratives
of a great number of quarrels begun and ended at 'Oka.... It was in
this congress of the Arab poets (and almost every warriour was a poet at
the age which I am considering) that the dialects of Arabia became fused
into a magic language, the language of the ejaz, which Moammad made
use of to subvert the world; for the triumph of Moammad is nothing else
than the triumph of speech."--The ur-an is regarded by the Arabs
as an everlasting miracle, surpassing all others, appealing to the
understanding of every generation by its inimitable eloquence. A
stronger proof of the power of language over their minds could hardly be
adduced; unless it be their being capable of receiving as a credible
fact the tradition that both genii and men were attracted by the
eloquent reading of David, when he recited the Psalms; that the wild
beasts and the birds were alike fascinated; and that sometimes there
were borne out from his assembly as many as four hundred corpses of men
who died from the excessive delight with which he thus inspired
them. It may be added that the recitation, or chanting, of the
ur-an is a favourite means of amusing the guests at modern private
festivities.

In what may be termed the Middle Age of Arabic literature, commencing
from the triumph of the Mohammadan religion, and extending to the
foundation of the Empire of Baghdad, the power of eloquence over the
educated classes of the Arabs probably increased in proportion as it
became less familiar to them: for, early in this age, they began to
simplify their spoken language in consequence of their intercourse with
strangers, who could not generally acquire the difficult, old dialect of
their conquerors: this, therefore, then began to be confined to literary
compositions. That such a change took place at this period appears from
several anecdotes interspersed in Arabic works. The Khaleefeh El-Weleed
(who reigned near the close of the first century of the Flight), the son
of 'Abd-El-Melik, spoke so corrupt a dialect that he often could not
make himself understood by the Arabs of the desert. A ridiculous
instance of the mistakes occasioned by his use of the simplified
language which is now current is related by Abu-l-Fida. The same author
adds, that the father and predecessor of this prince was a man of
eloquence, and that he was grieved by the corrupt speech of his son,
which he considered as a defect that incapacitated him to be a future
ruler of the Arabs, as they were still great admirers of purity of
speech, though so large a proportion of them spoke a corrupt dialect;
wherefore, he sent him to a house to be instructed by a grammarian; but
after the youth had remained there a long time, he returned to his
father more ignorant than before. Vulgarisms, however, would sometimes
escape from the mouth of 'Abd-El-Melik himself; yet, so sensible was he
to eloquence, that, when a learned man, with whom he was conversing,
elegantly informed him of an error of this kind, he ordered his mouth to
be filled with jewels. "These," said his courteous admonisher, "are
things to be treasured up; not to be expended:"--and for this delicate
hint, he was further rewarded with thirty thousand pieces of silver, and
several costly articles of apparel.--It may be aptly added, that
this Khaleefeh was, in the beginning of his reign, an unjust monarch;
and as he thus bore some slight resemblance to our Shahriyar, so was he
reclaimed to a sense of his duty by means somewhat similar. Being, one
night, unable to sleep, he called for a person to tell him a story for
his amusement. "O Prince of the Faithful," said the man thus bidden,
"there was an owl in El-Moil, and an owl in El-Barah; and the owl of
El-Moil demanded in marriage, for her son, the daughter of the owl of
El-Barah: but the owl of El-Barah said, 'I will not, unless thou give
me, as her dowry, a hundred desolate farms.' 'That I cannot do,' said
the owl of El-Moil, 'at present; but if our sovereign (may God, whose
name be exalted, preserve him!) live one year, I will give thee what
thou desirest.'"--This simple fable sufficed to rouse the prince from
his apathy, and he thenceforward applied himself to fulfil the duties of
his station.

In the most flourishing age of Arabic poetry and general literature and
science, commencing from the foundation of the Empire of Baghdad, and
extending to the conquest of Egypt by the 'Osmanlee Turks, the influence
of eloquent and entertaining language upon the character of the Arab
sovereigns was particularly exemplified. A few illustrative anecdotes
may here be inserted.

It is related by El-Ama'ee, that Haroon Er-Rasheed, at a grand fete
which he was giving, ordered the poet Abu-l-'Atahiyeh to depict, in
verse, the voluptuous enjoyments of his sovereign. The poet began
thus:--

  "Live long in safe enjoyment of thy desires, under the shadow
     of lofty palaces!"

"Well said!" exclaimed Er-Rasheed: "and what next?"

  "May thy wishes be abundantly fulfilled, whether at eventide
     or in the morning!"

"Well!" again said the Khaleefeh: "then what next?"

  "But when the rattling breath struggles in the dark cavity
     of the chest.
   Then shalt thou know surely, that thou hast been only in
     the midst of illusions."

--Er-Rasheed wept; and Fal, the son of Yaya, said, "The Prince of the
Faithful sent for thee to divert him, and thou hast plunged him into
grief." "Suffer him," said the prince; "for he hath beheld us in
blindness, and it displeased him to increase it."

The family of the Barmekees (one of the most brilliant ornaments of
which was the Wezeer Jaafar, who has been rendered agreeably familiar to
us by the many scenes in which he is introduced in the present work)
earned a noble and enduring reputation by their attachment to
literature, and the magnificent rewards they conferred on learned men.
It was peculiarly hard, therefore, that literature contributed to their
melancholy overthrow. Poets were employed by their enemies to compose
songs artfully pointed against them, to be sung before the prince to
whom they owed their power. Of one of these songs, the following lines
formed a part:--

  "Would that Hind had fulfilled the promises she made us, and healed
     the disease under which we suffer!
   That she had once, at least, acted for herself! for imbecile, indeed,
     is he who doth not so."

"Yea! By Allah! Imbecile!" exclaimed the Khaleefeh, on hearing these
verses: his jealousy was roused; and his vengeance soon after fell
heavily upon his former favourites.

One of the Khaleefehs having invited the poets of his day to his palace,
a Bedawee, carrying a water-jar to fill at the river, followed them, and
entered with them. The Khaleefeh, seeing this poor man with the jar on
his shoulder, asked him what brought him thither. He returned for answer
these words:--

  "Seeing that this company had girded on the saddles
   To repair to thy overflowing river, I came with my jar."

The Khaleefeh, delighted with his answer, gave orders to fill his jar
with gold.

In the present declining age of Arabian learning (which may be said to
have commenced about the period of the conquest of Egypt by the
'Osmanlees), literary recreations still exert a magic influence upon the
Arabs. Compositions of a similar nature to the tales of a Thousand and
One Nights (though regarded by the learned as idle stories unworthy of
being classed with their literature) enable numbers of professional
story-tellers to attract crowds of delighted listeners to the
coffee-shops of the East; and now that the original of the present work
is printed, and to be purchased at a moderate price, it will probably
soon, in a great measure, supersede the romances of Aboo-Zeyd, E-ahir,
and 'Antar. As a proof of the powerful fascinations with which the tales
of a Thousand and One Nights affect the mind of a highly-enlightened
Muslim, it may be mentioned that the latest native historian of Modern
Egypt, the sheykh 'Abd-Er-Raman El-Jabartee, so delighted in their
perusal that he took the trouble of refining the language of a copy of
them which he possessed, expunging or altering whatever was grossly
offensive to morality without the somewhat redeeming quality of wit, and
adding many facetie of his own, and of other literati. What has become
of this copy, I have been unable, though acquainted with several of his
friends, to discover.

NOTE 19. It is a common custom among the Muslims to give a present to a
person who brings good tidings. The word (bisharah) which I render "a
reward for bringing good news," literally signifies merely "good news;"
but it is often used, as in this case, in the former sense.

NOTE 20. A Mohammadan woman is not allowed to show her face to any men
excepting certain near relations and others whom the law prohibits her
from marrying. Who these are will be mentioned in a future note,
descriptive of the general laws and ceremonies of marriage. Respectable
females consider it a great disgrace to be seen unveiled by any men but
those above alluded to.

NOTE 21.--_On the_ Deenar _and_ Dirhem. The standards of gold and
silver coin, among the Arabs, were the deenar and the dirhem: therefore,
in this work, I call the former "a piece of gold," and the latter "a
piece of silver." Their values have varied considerably at different
periods; but in the present work, we shall sufficiently approximate to
the truth, if we understand the average value of the former to be about
ten shillings or half a guinea; and that of the latter, about sixpence.

NOTE 22.--_Description of Shops._ In Eastern cities, most of the great
thoroughfare-streets, and many others, have a row of shops along each
side, not communicating with the superstructures; which latter are
divided into separate lodgings, inhabited by different families, and
seldom by the persons who rent the shops beneath. These streets are
called, in Arabic, "Soos;" and are generally termed by us, "Bazars." A
whole street of this description, or a portion of such a street,
commonly contains only or chiefly shops appropriated to a particular
trade; and is called the Soo of that trade. In general, the shop is a
small recess or cell, about six or seven feet high, and between three
and four feet wide, the floor of which is even with the top of a raised
seat of stone or brick, called "maabah," between two and three feet
high, and about the same in breadth; upon which the shopkeeper usually
sits. The front of the shop is furnished with shutters; which, when
closed, at night, are secured by a wooden lock. Several of the
engravings in this work will convey a better notion of shops of
different kinds than a more detailed description.

NOTE 23. Distrust in his governors and relations and acquaintance often
induces an Arab to hide his money under the paved floor of a room, or in
some other place, in his house.

NOTE 24. These words, "I give myself to thee," uttered by a woman to a
man, even without the presence of witnesses, if they cannot be easily
procured, render her his lawful wife, if he replies that he accepts her,
and gives her a dowry.

NOTE 25. I have substituted "Jinneeyeh" (agreeably with the Calcutta
edition of the first two hundred nights, and because the context
requires it) for "'Efreeteh," which signifies a powerful and evil female
genie.--The tale to which this note refers may be illustrated by the
following anecdote, which was related to me by a Persian with whom I was
acquainted in Cairo, named Abu-l-asim, a native of Geelan, then
superintendent of the Basha's Printing-office at Boola.

One of this person's countrymen, whom he asserted to be a man of
indubitable veracity, was sitting on the roof of a house which he had
hired, overlooking the Ganges, and was passing the closing hour of the
day, according to his usual custom, smoking his Persian pipe, and
feasting his eyes by gazing at the beautiful forms of Indian maidens
bathing in the river, when he beheld among them one so lovely that his
heart was overpowered with desire to have her for his wife. At nightfall
she came to him, and told him that she had observed his emotion, and
would consent to become his wife; but on the condition that he should
never admit another female to take or share her place, and that she
should only be with him in the night-time. They took the marriage-vow to
each other, with none for their witness but God; and great was his
happiness, till, one evening, he saw again, among a group of girls in
the river, another who excited in him still more powerful emotions. To
his surprise, this very form stood before him at the approach of night.
He withstood the temptation, mindful of his marriage-vow: she used every
allurement; but he was resolute. His fair visiter then told him that she
was his wife; that she was a Jinneeyeh; and that she would always
thenceforward visit him in the form of any female whom he might chance
to prefer.

NOTE 26. This form of benediction is almost always added when the
Prophet is mentioned in a book by any of his followers, and often also
in conversation.

NOTE 27. Perhaps it is needless to explain this proverb by the words of
the Bible--"Vengeance is mine; I will repay, saith the Lord." (Romans,
xii. 19.) For the honour of the Muslims I must say that this maxim is
often observed by them, excepting in cases to which the law of
retaliation applies.

NOTE 28. The houses in Arabian countries generally have flat roofs, upon
which, in the summer, some of the inhabitants often sleep: the interior,
therefore, is as accessible from the roof as from the common entrance.

NOTE 29. I here steer a middle course between my usual standard
copy--which gives the story of the third sheykh more fully than I have
done--and the Calcutta edition of the first two hundred nights, which
omits it altogether, as does also the copy from which the old
translation was made, perhaps on account of its uninteresting nature.