THE BARBER'S STORY OF HIS FIRST BROTHER.

Know, O Prince of the Faithful, that the first (who was named
El-Baboo) was the lame one. He practised the art of a tailor in
Baghdad, and used to sew in a shop which he hired of a man possessing
great wealth, who lived over the shop, and who had, in the lower part of
his house, a mill. And as my lame brother was sitting in his shop one
day, sewing, he raised his head, and saw a woman like the rising full
moon, at a projecting window of the house, looking at the people passing
by; and as soon as he beheld her, his heart was entangled by her love.
He passed that day gazing at her, and neglecting his occupation, until
the evening; and on the following morning he opened his shop, and sat
down to sew; but every time that he sewed a stitch, he looked towards
the window; and in this state he continued, sewing nothing sufficient to
earn a piece of silver.

On the third day he seated himself again in his place, looking towards
the woman; and she saw him, and, perceiving that he had become enslaved
by her love, laughed in his face, and he, in like manner, laughed in her
face. She then disappeared from before him, and sent to him her
slave-girl, with a wrapper containing a piece of red flowered silk; and
the girl, coming to him, said to him, My mistress saluteth thee, and
desireth thee to cut out for her, with the hand of skill, a shirt of
this piece, and to sew it beautifully. So he answered, I hear and
obey:--and he cut out for her the shirt, and finished the sewing of it
on that day; and on the following day the slave-girl came to him again;
and said to him, My mistress saluteth thee, and saith to thee, How didst
thou pass last night?--for she tasted not sleep, from her passion for
thee.--She then placed before him a piece of yellow satin, and said to
him, My mistress desireth thee to cut out for her, of this piece, two
pairs of trousers, and to make them this day. He replied, I hear and
obey. Salute her with abundant salutations, and say to her, Thy slave is
submissive to thine order, and command him to do whatsoever thou
wilt.--He then busied himself with the cutting out, and used all
diligence in sewing the two pairs of trousers; and presently the woman
looked out at him from the window, and saluted him by a sign, now
casting down her eyes, and now smiling in his face, so that he imagined
he should soon obtain possession of her. After this, she disappeared
from before him, and the slave-girl came to him; so he delivered to her
the two pairs of trousers, and she took them and departed: and when the
night came, he threw himself upon his bed, and remained turning himself
over in restlessness until the morning.

On the following day, the master of the house came to my brother,
bringing some linen, and said to him, Cut out and make this into shirts
for me. He replied, I hear and obey:--and ceased not from his work until
he had cut out twenty shirts by the time of nightfall, without having
tasted food. The man then said to him, How much is thy hire for
this?--but my brother answered not; and the damsel made a sign to him
that he should receive nothing, though he was absolutely in want of a
single copper coin. For three days he continued scarcely eating or
drinking anything, in his diligence to accomplish his work, and when he
had finished it, he went to deliver the shirts.

Now the young woman had acquainted her husband with the state of my
brother's mind, but my brother knew not this; and she planned with her
husband to employ him in sewing without remuneration, and moreover to
amuse themselves by laughing at him: so, when he had finished all the
work that they gave him, they contrived a plot against him, and married
him to their slave-girl; and on the night when he desired to introduce
himself to her, they said to him, Pass this night in the mill, and
to-morrow thou shalt enjoy happiness. My brother, therefore, thinking
that their intention was good, passed the night in the mill alone.
Meanwhile, the husband of the young woman went to the miller, and
instigated him by signs to make my brother turn the mill. The miller,
accordingly, went in to him at midnight, and began to exclaim, Verily
this bull is lazy, while there is a great quantity of wheat, and the
owners of the flour are demanding it: I will therefore yoke him in the
mill, that he may finish the grinding of the flour:--and so saying, he
yoked my brother, and thus he kept him until near morning, when the
owner of the house came, and saw him yoked in the mill, and the miller
flogging him with the whip; and he left him, and retired. After this,
the slave-girl to whom he had been contracted in marriage came to him
early in the morning, and, having unbound him from the mill, said to
him, Both I and my mistress have been distressed by this which hath
befallen thee, and we have participated in the burden of thy sorrow. But
he had no tongue wherewith to answer her, by reason of the severity of
the flogging. He then returned to his house; and lo, the sheykh who had
performed the marriage-contract came and saluted him, saying, May God
prolong thy life! May thy marriage be blessed!--May God not preserve the
liar! returned my brother: thou thousandfold villain! By Allah, I went
only to turn the mill in the place of the bull until the morning.--Tell
me thy story, said the sheykh:--and my brother told him what had
happened to him: upon which the sheykh said, Thy star agreeth not with
hers: but if thou desire that I should change for thee the mode of the
contract, I will change it for another better than it, that thy star may
agree with hers.--See then, replied my brother, if thou hast
any other contrivance to employ.

My brother then left him, and repaired again to his shop, hoping that
somebody might give him some work, with the profit of which he might
obtain his food; and lo, the slave-girl came to him. She had conspired
with her mistress to play him this trick, and said to him, Verily, my
mistress is longing for thee, and she hath gone up to look at thy face
from the window. And my brother had scarcely heard these words when she
looked out at him from the window, and, weeping, said, Wherefore hast
thou cut short the intercourse between us and thee? But he returned her
no answer: so she swore to him that all that had happened to him in the
mill was not with her consent; and when my brother beheld her beauty and
loveliness, the troubles that had befallen him became effaced from his
memory, and he accepted her excuse, and rejoiced at the sight of her. He
saluted her, therefore, and conversed with her, and then sat a while at
his work; after which the slave-girl came to him, and said, My mistress
saluteth thee, and informeth thee that her husband hath determined to
pass this next night in the house of one of his intimate friends;
wherefore, when he hath gone thither, do thou come to her.--Now the
husband of the young woman had said to her, How shall we contrive when
he cometh to thee that I may take him and drag him before the Walee? She
replied, Let me then play him a trick, and involve him in a disgrace for
which he shall be paraded throughout this city as an example to
others:--and my brother knew nothing of the craftiness of women.
Accordingly, at the approach of evening, the slave-girl came to him,
and, taking him by the hand, returned with him to her mistress, who said
to him, Verily, O my master, I have been longing for thee.--Hasten then,
said he, to give me a kiss, first of all. And his words were not
finished, when the young woman's husband came in from his neighbour's
house, and, seizing my brother, exclaimed to him, By Allah, I will not
loose thee but in the presence of the chief magistrate of the police. My
brother humbled himself before him; but, without listening to him, he
took him to the house of the Walee, who flogged him with whips, and
mounted him upon a camel, and conveyed him through the streets of the
city, the people crying out, This is the recompense of him who breaketh
into the areems of others!--and he fell from the camel, and his leg
broke: so he became lame. The Walee then banished him from the city; and
he went forth, not knowing whither to turn his steps: but I, though
enraged, overtook him, and brought him back; and I have taken upon
myself to provide him with meat and drink unto the present day.

The Khaleefeh laughed at my story, and exclaimed, Thou hast spoken
well:--but I replied, I will not accept this honour until thou hast
listened to me while I relate to thee what happened to the rest of my
brothers; and think me not a man of many words.--Tell me, said the
Khaleefeh, what happened to all thy brothers, and grace my ears with
these nice particulars: I beg thee to employ exuberance of diction in
thy relation of these pleasant tales.