THE BARBER'S STORY OF HIS THIRD BROTHER.

As to my third brother (the blind man, Baba), who was also surnamed
uffeh, fate and destiny impelled him one day to a large
house, and he knocked at the door, hoping that its master would answer
him, and that he might beg of him a trifle. The owner called out, Who is
at the door?--but my brother answered not; and then heard him call with
a loud voice, Who is this? Still, however, he returned him no answer;
and he heard the sounds of his footsteps approaching until he came to
the door and opened it, when he said to him, What dost thou desire? My
brother answered, Something for the sake of God, whose name be
exalted!--Art thou blind? said the man; and my brother answered,
Yes.--Then give me thy hand rejoined the master of the house;--so my
brother stretched forth to him his hand, and the man took him into the
house, and led him up from stair-case to stair-case until he had
ascended to the highest platform of the roof: my brother thinking that
he was going to give him some food or money: and when he had arrived at
this highest terrace, of his house, the owner said, What dost thou
desire, O blind man!--I desire something, he answered again, for the
sake of God, whose name be exalted!--May God, replied the man, open to
thee some other way!--What is this! exclaimed my brother: couldst thou
not tell me so when I was below?--Thou vilest of the vile! retorted the
other: why didst thou not ask of me something for the sake of God when
thou heardest my voice the first time, when thou wast knocking at the
door?--What then, said my brother, dost thou mean to do to me?--The man
of the house answered, I have nothing to give thee.--Then take me down
the stairs, said my brother. The man replied, The way is before thee. So
my brother made his way to the stairs, and continued descending until
there remained, between him and the door, twenty steps, when his foot
slipped and he fell, and, rolling down, broke his head.

He went forth, not knowing whither to direct his steps, and presently
there met him two blind men, his companions, who said to him, What hath
happened to thee this day? My brother, therefore, related to them the
event that had just befallen him: and then said to them, O my brothers,
I desire to take a portion of the money now in our possession, to expend
it upon myself.--Now the owner of the house which he had just before
entered had followed him to acquaint himself with his proceedings, and
without my brother's knowledge he walked behind him until the latter
entered his abode; when he went in after him, still unknown. My brother
then sat waiting for his companions; and when they came in to him, he
said to them, Shut the door, and search the room, lest any stranger have
followed us. When the intruder, therefore, heard what he said, he arose,
and clung to a rope that was attached to the ceiling; and the blind men
went feeling about the whole of the chamber, and, finding no one,
returned and seated themselves by my brother, and brought forth their
money, and counted it; and lo, it was more than ten thousand pieces of
silver. Having done this, they laid it in a corner of the room, and each
of them took of the surplus of that sum as much as he wanted, and they
buried the ten thousand pieces of silver in the earth; after which, they
placed before themselves some food, and sat eating; but my brother heard
the sound of a stranger by his side, and said to his friends, Is there a
stranger among us? Then stretching forth his hand, it grasped the hand
of the intruder; whereupon he cried out to his companions, saying, Here
is a stranger!--and they fell upon him with blows until they were tired,
when they shouted out, O Muslims! a thief hath come in upon
us, and desireth to take our property!--and immediately a number of
persons collected around them.

Upon this, the stranger whom they accused of being a thief shut his
eyes, feigned to be blind like themselves, so that no one who saw him
doubted him to be so; and shouted, O Muslims! I demand protection of
Allah and the Sulan! I demand protection of Allah and the Walee! I
demand protection of Allah and the Emeer! for I have important
information to give to the Emeer!--and before they could collect their
thoughts, the officers of the Walee surrounded them and took them all,
including my brother, and conducted them before their master. The Walee
said, What is your story?--and the stranger replied, Hear my words, O
Walee; the truth of our case will not become known to thee but by means
of beating; and if thou wilt, begin by beating me before my
companions. The Walee therefore said, Throw down this man, and flog him
with whips:--and accordingly they threw him down and flogged him; and
when the stripes tortured him, he opened one of his eyes; and after they
had continued the flogging a little longer, he opened his other eye;
upon which the Walee exclaimed, What meaneth this conduct, O thou
villain?--Grant me indemnity, replied the man, and I will acquaint
thee:--and the Walee having granted his request, he said, We four
pretend that we are blind, and, intruding among other people, enter
their houses, and see their women, and employ stratagems to corrupt
them, and to obtain money from them. We have acquired, by these means,
vast gain, amounting to ten thousand pieces of silver; and I said to my
companions, Give me my due, two thousand and five hundred; and they rose
against me and beat me, and took my property. I beg protection,
therefore, of Allah and of thee; and thou art more deserving of my share
than they. If thou desire to know the truth of that which I have said,
flog each of them more than thou hast flogged me, and he will open his
eyes.

So the Walee immediately gave orders to flog them, and the first of them
who suffered was my brother. They continued beating him until he almost
died; when the Walee said to them, O ye scoundrels! do ye deny the
gracious gift of God, feigning yourselves to be blind? My brother
exclaimed, Allah! Allah! Allah! there is none among us who seeth!--They
then threw him down again, and ceased not to beat him until he became
insensible, when the Walee said, Leave him until he shall have
recovered, and then give him a third flogging:--and in the meantime, he
gave orders to flog his companions, to give each of them more than three
hundred stripes; while the seeing man said to them, Open your eyes, or
they will flog you again after this time. Then addressing himself to the
Walee, he said, Send with me some person to bring thee the property; for
these men will not open their eyes, fearing to be disgraced before the
spectators. And the Walee sent with him a man, who brought him the
money; and he took it, and gave to the informer, out of it, two
thousand and five hundred pieces of silver, according to the share which
he claimed, in spite of the others (retaining the rest), and banished
from the city my brother and the two other men; but I went forth, O
Prince of the Faithful, and, having overtaken my brother, asked him
respecting his sufferings; and he acquainted me with that which I have
related unto thee. I then brought him back secretly into the city, and
allotted him a supply of food and drink as long as he lived.

The Khaleefeh laughed at my story, and said, Give him a present, and let
him go:--but I replied, I will receive nothing until I have declared to
the Prince of the Faithful what happened to the rest of my brothers, and
made it manifest to him that I am a man of few words:--whereupon the
Khaleefeh said, Crack our ears, then, with thy ridiculous stories, and
continue to us thy disclosure of vices and misdeeds. So I proceeded
thus:--