NOTES TO CHAPTER SEVENTH.

NOTE 1. Damascus is afterwards mentioned in the original as the abode of
this merchant's family; but not here.

NOTE 2. "Ghanim" signifies "a taker of spoil," "a fortunate acquirer of
anything;" and "Eiyoob" is the name which _we_ call "Job."

NOTE 3. "Fitneh" signifies "temptation," "seduction," "disturbance," &c.

NOTE 4. By the term "loads" we are always to understand "camel-loads,"
unless it is otherwise expressed. A camel-load is generally about three
hundred-weights.

NOTE 5. Or vesicles of musk. In the original, "nawafe" is put for
"nawafij."

NOTE 6. A great recompense in the world to come is to be the lot of him
who takes part in a funeral-procession.

NOTE 7. The ablution was necessary to qualify Ghanim for joining in the
prayer over the dead.

NOTE 8. "awab" signifies "rectitude."

NOTE 9. "Kafoor" is the Arabic for "camphor." Instances of antiphrasis
in the names given to black slaves are very common.

NOTE 10. "Bakheet" signifies "fortunate," from "bakht" ("fortune"), a
word borrowed from the Persian.

NOTE 11. I am not sure that this is to be understood as a jest; for I
have been assured, by a slave-dealer and other persons in Cairo, that
sometimes slaves brought to that city are found to be cannibals; and
that a proof lately occurred there; an infant having been eaten by its
black nurse. I was also told that these cannibals are generally
distinguished by an elongation of the os coccygis; or in other words,
that they have tails!

NOTE 12. The story here alluded to is inserted in the original; but,
being extremely objectionable, and too short and simple to be abridged,
I have been compelled to omit it altogether.

NOTE 13. This story is not in the old version; but I think the reader
will consider it worthy of insertion in the present series, as an
amusing illustration of the customs which are often observed by the
Arabs on the occasion of the death of the master of a family. I can bear
testimony to the general correctness of the picture which it presents;
or rather state, that the greatest of the extravagances which it
describes are not unfrequently practised in the present day.

NOTE 14. As the Arab women are much more reluctant to uncover the upper
and back part of the head than they are to shew the face, before strange
men, such a scene as that which is here described is very seldom
witnessed; but I have seen not so unfrequently a woman with her face
uncovered, and besmeared with mud, on her receiving the news of the
sudden death of a near relation.

NOTE 15. This, to some readers, may require explanation. To free a slave
who has no means of providing for himself, and not to grant him any
means to do so, is almost the heaviest punishment that can be inflicted
upon him; and to do this, unless for a heinous crime, is considered
disgraceful.

NOTE 16. This is not just; for as soon as the slave is emancipated he is
legally free, without doubt: but it is inserted in the tale as a
jest.

NOTE 17. See Note 46 to Chapter ii.--This mode of disposing of a rival
in the areem is said to have been not very unfrequently adopted.

NOTE 18. I suspect that the original presents here an error, which I
have endeavoured to correct.--The names which the lady ejaculates are to
be understood as those of female slaves, her attendants.
"Zahr-el-Bustan" signifies "Flower of the Garden;" "abeeah,"
"Beautiful;" "Shejeret-ed-Durr," "Tree of Pearls" (this is the vulgar
mode of pronouncing "Shejer-ed-Durr," which was the name of the wife of
the Sulan E-ale Nejm-ed-Deen, afterwards Queen of Egypt);
"Noor-el-Huda," "Light of Day," or "Light of Guidance;"
"Nejmet-e-ub," "Star of the Morning;" "Nuzheh," "Delight;" "ulweh,"
"Sweet;" and "areefeh," "Elegant."

NOTE 19. From this point, to the relation of the stratagem employed by
Zubeydeh, I omit much that is unsuitable for insertion in the
translation, as approaching to licentiousness.

NOTE 20. Perhaps it is unnecessary to mention, that "the Prophet's
Uncle" here alluded to was El-'Abbas; and that the "descendant" was
Haroon Er-Rasheed.

NOTE 21. "oot-el-uloob" signifies "Food (or Sustenance) of Hearts."

NOTE 22. As black, which was the distinguishing colour of the banners
and dress of the 'Abbasee Khaleefehs, was originally assumed in token of
mourning for such of their relations as were victims of the Umawees, it
may have continued for a long time to be used for a similar purpose: but
the modern colour of mourning among the Arabs is blue; and it is
remarkable that the term which properly signifies "black" is commonly
applied by them to dark blue.--On the subject of mourning, see Note 52
to Chapter ii.

NOTE 23. "Kheyzuran" and "aeeb" signify respectively, "a Cane"
(particularly "Indian Cane"), and "a Rod," or "a long and slender
Branch."

NOTE 24. See note 85 to Chapter iii.

NOTE 25. By "the Sulan" is meant the Viceroy of Damascus, though the
title is improperly used in this sense.

NOTE 26. The account of the disgusting treatment of Ghanim's mother and
sister, which follows in this place in the old version, is not in either
of the copies of the original which I possess, containing this tale.
Hence, and as it is extremely inconsistent with Arab customs and
feelings, I have little doubt of its being an interpolation by some
ignorant copyist.

NOTE 27. See Note 18 to Chapter vi.

NOTE 28, By Ghanim's areem, we are here to understand his mother and
sister; the term "areem" being often used to signify a man's female
relations residing in his house.

NOTE 29. It is implied that she visited the sheykhs (by which are here
meant the devotees) to request the aid of their prayers; and gave alms
for the sake (or in the name) of Ghanim in order to propitiate
Providence in his favour.

NOTE 30.--_On the Charitable Disposition of the Arabs._ Some remarks
which I have made on this subject with reference to the Egyptians, in a
former work, are equally applicable to the Arabs in general.
"Benevolence and charity to the poor are virtues which the Egyptians
possess in an eminent degree, and which are instilled into their hearts
by religion; but from their own profession it appears that they are as
much excited to the giving of alms by the expectation of enjoying
corresponding rewards in heaven, as by pity for the distresses of their
fellow-creatures, or a disinterested wish to do the will of God. It may
be attributed, in some measure, to the charitable disposition of the
inhabitants, that beggars are so numerous in Cairo. The many handsome
Sebeels, or public fountains (buildings erected and endowed for the
gratuitous supply of water to passengers), which are seen in this city,
and the more humble structures of the same kind in the villages and
fields, are monuments of the same virtue." So also the numerous
Khans for the reception of travellers, in countries occupied by the
Arabs, bear testimony to the charity of this people.

NOTE 31. This is often said by an Arab to a person against whom he knows
or fears himself to have committed an offence. The most urgent reason
for doing so may be seen by reverting to No. 9 of the notes to Chapter
iv.

NOTE 32. This compliment has occasioned, in the old version, an error of
the most serious kind, by its having been understood in its literal
sense. Ghanim is made to propose that the Khaleefeh should take his
sister as one of his favourites (_i. e._ concubines); which, as she was
a free woman, would be a crime of the foulest nature.

NOTE 33. We are to understand this sum of money as being Fitneh's
dowry.--Here it may be mentioned, that the Khaleefeh, by marrying
Fitneh, severely punished Zubeydeh: for he thus gave her a wife, instead
of a concubine, as a rival.

NOTE 34.--_On the Passion of Love among the Arabs._ A few remarks on
this subject may be inserted to justify the picture of love presented in
the foregoing tale. That sensual passion is most prevalent among the
Arabs cannot be doubted; but I think it unjust to suppose them generally
incapable of a purer feeling, worthy, if constancy be a sufficient test,
of being termed true love. That they are not so, appears evident to
almost every person who mixes with them in familiar society; for such a
person must have opportunities of being acquainted with many Arabs
sincerely attached to wives whose personal charms have long vanished,
and who have neither wealth nor influence of their own, nor wealthy nor
influential relations, to induce their husbands to refrain from
divorcing them. It very often happens, too, that an Arab is sincerely
attached to a wife possessed, even in the best portion of her age, of
few charms; and that the lasting favourite among two or more wives is
not the most handsome. This opinion, I am sorry to observe, is at
variance, as far as the Arabs of the _towns_ are concerned, with that
entertained by one of the most intelligent and experienced of modern
travellers, who long resided among this people,--the justly-celebrated
Burckhardt: but it is confirmed by numerous facts related by
respectable Arab authors (and therefore not regarded by them as of an
incredible nature), as well as by cases which have fallen under my own
observation. The tale of Leyla and Mejnoon, "the Juliet and Romeo of
Arabia," is too well known to be here repeated; but among many other
anecdotes of strong and constant love, the following may be inserted:--

The Khaleefeh Yezeed the son of 'Abd-El-Melik, it is said, had two
female slaves; one of whom was named abbabeh, and the other, Selameh;
to the former of whom he was most ardently attached: he had purchased
her for a hundred thousand dirhems; and the other, for ten thousand. In
the company of these two females he sometimes shut himself up for three
months together, utterly neglecting the affairs of his people. At
length, being reproved for this conduct by his brother Meslemeh, he
promised to return to his duty: but the two slaves diverted him from his
purpose; and on the following morning, excited by their songs and
caresses, and by wine, he became frantic with pleasure, and danced and
sang like a madman, till a fatal accident put a stop to his joy:
abbabeh, eating a pomegranate, was choked by one of the grains, and
immediately died. The grief of Yezeed was so poignant that he would not
quit the corpse, but continued to kiss and fondle it until it became
putrid. Being then admonished by his attendants that proper respect
required its burial, he consented to commit it to the earth: after five
days, however, his desire again to behold the object of his love induced
him to open the grave, and though the corpse had become hideous, he
declared that it was lovely as ever in his eyes. At the earnest request
of Meslemeh, he ordered the grave to be closed again; but he was unable
to exist when deprived of the sight of the remains of her who was at the
same time his slave and his mistress: he threw himself upon his bed,
speechless; and after lingering seventeen nights, expired, and was
buried by the side of abbabeh. "May God," says the narrator, "have
mercy on them both!"

In the same work from which the above is taken, it is related that
Haroon Er-Rasheed, visiting Suleyman the son of Aboo-Jaafar, one of his
chief officers, saw with him a female slave, named a'eefeh, of
excessive beauty, and being smitten by her charms, demanded her as a
present. His request was granted; but Suleyman from grief at the loss of
his mistress, fell sick; and during his illness was heard to exclaim,--

 "I appeal unto God against the affliction which He hath sent
     upon me through the Khaleefeh.
  The world heareth of his justice; but he is a tyrant in the affair
     of a'eefeh.
  Love of her is fixed in my heart as ink upon the surface of paper."

Er-Rasheed, being informed of his complaint, restored to him his
mistress, and, with her, his peace of mind.--This anecdote is given as a
proof of strong love; but perhaps may not be thought much to the
purpose. The following, from the same work, is more apt.

During the hottest hour of an excessively sultry day, the Khaleefeh
Mo'awiyeh the son of Aboo-Sufyan was sitting in a chamber which was open
on each side to allow free passage to the air, when he beheld a
barefooted Bedawee approaching him. Wondering what could induce this man
to brave the scorching heat, he declared to his attendants that, if he
were come to demand of him any favour or aid or act of justice, his
request should be granted. The Bedawee addressed him, in verse, with a
pathetic appeal for justice against the tyranny of Marwan the son of
El-akam (afterwards Khaleefeh, Mo'awiyeh's fourth successor), by whom
he had been forcibly deprived of his beloved wife, named Soada. The
Khaleefeh requiring a more particular account of his case, he related
the following facts. He had a wife, the daughter of his paternal uncle,
excessively beloved by him, and he possessed a number of camels, which
enabled him to live in comfort; but a year of terrible drought deprived
him of his property, and reduced him to utter want: his friends deserted
him, and his wife was taken away from him by her father. To seek
redress, he repaired to Marwan, the Governor of his district, at
El-Medeeneh, who, having summoned the father of his wife, and herself,
was so smitten by the beauty of the woman that he determined to obtain
her for himself in marriage; to accomplish which, he threw the husband
into prison, and offered the father of the woman a thousand deenars and
ten thousand dirhems for his consent to his marriage with her, promising
to compel her actual husband to divorce her; and this latter object,
having obtained the father's approval, he gained by severely torturing
the unfortunate Bedawee. It would have been vain for the woman to
attempt resistance; and so she became the wife of Marwan.--The oppressed
Bedawee, having related these circumstances, fell down in a swoon, and
lay on the floor senseless, coiled up like a dead snake. As soon as he
recovered, the Khaleefeh wrote a poetical epistle to Marwan, severely
reproaching him for his baseness, and commanding him, on pain of death,
to divorce the woman and send her with his messenger. She was
accordingly divorced and sent, with an answer composed in the same
measure and rhyme, assuring the Khaleefeh that the sight of Soada would
convince him that her charms were irresistible; and this proved too
true. Mo'awiyeh himself no sooner saw her than he coveted the possession
of her, and offered to give the Bedawee, if he would resign her to him,
three virgins from among his female slaves, together with a thousand
deenars, and an ample annual pension. The Bedawee shrieked with dismay,
as though he had received his death-blow; and indignantly rejected the
offer. The Khaleefeh then said to him, "Thou confessest that thou hast
divorced her, and Marwan has married her and acknowledged that he has
divorced her: we will therefore give her her choice: if she desire any
other than thee as her husband we will marry her to him, and if she
prefer thee we will restore her to thee." She however preferred the
destitute Bedawee, and the Khaleefeh gave her up to him, with a present
of ten thousand dirhems.

Numerous instances of unreasonable love are recorded in the writings of
Arabs. It is related that a man fell in love with a female from seeing
the impression of her hand upon a wall; and being unable to obtain
possession of her, died. Many men are said, to have conceived a violent
passion for females seen in dreams: others, again, to have been thus
affected merely by the ear. An author relates his having been acquainted
with an accomplished schoolmaster who lost his heart from hearing a man
sing the praises of a woman named Umm-'Amr, and two days after, shut
himself up in his house to mourn for her death, in consequence of his
hearing the same man sing,--

  "The ass went away with Umm-'Amr; and she returned not, nor did
     the ass return."

But a few anecdotes may be considered as rare exceptions to a general
rule. I think, however, that strong evidences of the existence of true
love among all classes of the Arabs are afforded by their very numerous
tales of fiction descriptive of this passion.


   Marginal note by my sheykh.

   Modern Egyptians, vol. i. ch. xiii.

   I may suffer in public estimation for my differing in opinion from
  this accomplished traveller and most estimable man; but I cannot, on
  that account, abstain from the expression of my dissent. Our difference,
  I think, may be thus explained. He conformed, in a great degree, to the
  habits of the Arabs; but not to such an extent as I consider necessary
  to obtain from them that confidence in his sympathy which would induce
  them to lay open to him their character; and when a man is often treated
  with coldness and reserve, I doubt whether the people from whom he
  experiences such treatment can be judged by him with strict
  impartiality. To be received on terms of equality by Arabs of the more
  polished classes, an undeviating observance of their code of etiquette
  is absolutely indispensable: but Burckhardt, I have been assured, often
  violated this code, by practices harmless enough to our notions, and
  probably, also, in the opinion of the Arabs of the Desert, but extremely
  offensive to the people who enjoyed the least share of his esteem: his
  most intimate acquaintances in Cairo generally refused, in speaking of
  him, to designate him by the title of "sheykh" which he had adopted; and
  yet the heaviest charge that I heard brought against him was his
  frequent habit of _whistling_!--This fact has been mentioned, as
  corroborating an observation of the same kind, by Mr. Urquhart ("Spirit
  of the East," vol. i. pp. 417 and 418), all of whose opinions relating
  to the East, expressed in the work here referred to, and especially
  those regarding the characteristics of the Eastern _mind_, are entitled
  to the highest respect.

[A very remarkable instance, confirming Mr. Lane's opinion of the
existence of true love among the Arabs, occurred during my residence
with him in Cairo. The wife of a man of good birth, and holding a high
position in that city, was accused of carrying on an intrigue while
visiting the tombs of her relations. Her family claimed her in
accordance with the law, and threatened to put her to death, as the law
would undoubtedly have justified them in doing, if the case were proved
against her. Her husband was much attached to her--she was his first and
only wife--and he believed, with reason, that the accusation was false:
at the same time he knew that she would in all likelihood find it
impossible to clear herself in a court of law, where justice is only
accidentally awarded, and had good cause to fear that her male relations
would put her to death without a hearing. He therefore adopted the
extraordinary expedient of taking her secretly to the house of a married
European gentleman of his acquaintance. There she remained concealed for
some time, her husband visiting her daily, and shewing the most perfect
confidence in his friend; while the latter was almost confined to one
room, never venturing into the areem without calling "Permission!" at
every few steps. In the mean time, the indignation of the lady's friends
cooled, and the affair was cleared up. She has since lived in perfect
happiness with her husband.

To any one familiar with Eastern customs and modes of thought, a
stronger proof of sincere love could scarcely be given, than that a man
should thus set aside the strongest prejudices of his nation to save the
honour, and perhaps the life, of his wife, disbelieving a report which,
from its plausibility, might have been accepted without hesitation. The
facilities afforded by the visits to the cemeteries are notorious, and
the state of morals among the women of Egypt unfortunately makes their
defence difficult in a suspicious case.--ED.]


   Kitab el-'Onwan fee Mekaid en-Niswan (MS. in my
  possession).

   This word slightly varied (changed to a'eefih) bears
  another meaning; namely, "his weak one:" the final vowel being
  suppressed by the rule of waf.

   Kitab el-'Onwan, &c.