CONTINUATION OF THE STORY OF TAJ-EL-MULOOK AND THE LADY DUNYA.

When Taj-el-Mulook heard this story, his heart became troubled with love
for the lady Dunya. He then mounted his horse, and, taking with him
'Azeez, returned to his father's city, where he assigned to him a house,
and furnished it with everything that he required; after which he left
him, and repaired to his palace. His tears ran down upon his cheeks (for
hearing affecteth as sight and union), and in this state he remained
until his father came in to him, and, finding that his colour was
changed, knew that he was oppressed by anxiety and grief: so he said to
him, O my son, acquaint me with thy case, and tell me what hath happened
to thee to change thy colour. He therefore related to him all that he
had heard of the story of Dunya, and how he had fallen in love with her
from hearsay, without having seen her; whereupon his father said to him,
O my son, her father is a King, and his country is distant from us:
abandon, therefore, this idea, and enter the palace of thy mother; for
in it are five hundred female slaves like so many moons, and whoever of
them pleaseth thee do thou take her; or, if none of them please thee, we
will demand in marriage for thee one of the daughters of the Kings, more
beautiful than the lady Dunya. But he replied, O my father, I desire not
any but her: it was she who worked the design of the gazelles that I
saw, and I must have her, or I will flee into the deserts, and kill
myself on her account.

So his father said, Have patience with me, O my son, that I may send to
her father and demand her of him in marriage, and accomplish for thee
thy wish, like as I did for myself in the case of thy mother; and if he
consent not, I will convulse his kingdom around him, and send against
him an army of which the rear shall be with me when the van is with him.
He then called for the young man 'Azeez, and said to him, O my son,
knowest thou the way? He answered, Yes.--Then I desire of thee, said the
King, that thou journey with my Wezeer. And 'Azeez replied, I hear and
obey, O King of the age. The King, therefore, summoned his Wezeer, and
said to him, Manage for me the affair of my son according to thy
knowledge, and repair to the Islands of Camphor, and demand in marriage
the daughter of their King. He replied, I hear and obey. And
Taj-el-Mulook returned to his apartments, and his malady and impatience
increased: he fell down in a swoon, and recovered not until the morning;
and when the morning arrived, his father came to him, and saw his
complexion more changed, and his sallowness increased; and he exhorted
him to patience, and promised him the accomplishment of his union.

The King then equipped 'Azeez, with his Wezeer, and supplied them with
the presents; and they journeyed days and nights until they beheld the
Islands of Camphor, when they halted on the bank of a river, and the
Wezeer sent forward a messenger from his party to the King, to acquaint
him with their approach; and half a day after the departure of the
messenger, suddenly they saw that the chamberlains of the King, and his
emeers, had advanced to meet them from the distance of a league; and
they met him, and attended them until they went in with them to the
King. They placed before the King the presents, and remained in his
palace four days; and on the fifth day the Wezeer arose and went in to
the King, and, standing before him, delivered to him his message, and
acquainted him with the cause of his coming; but the King was perplexed
how to answer, for his daughter liked not marriage; and he hung down his
head for a while towards the floor; and after this he raised it, and,
looking towards one of the eunuchs, said to him, Go to thy mistress
Dunya, and acquaint her with what thou hast heard, and with the purpose
of the visit of this Wezeer. So the eunuch went, and, after a short
absence, returned to the King, and said to him, O King of the age, when
I went in to the lady Dunya, and acquainted her with what I had heard,
she was violently enraged, and rose against me with a stick, and would
have broken my head; wherefore I fled from her; and she said to me, If
my father force me to marry, him whom I marry I will kill. Her father,
therefore, said to the Wezeer and 'Azeez, Salute ye the King, and inform
him of this, and that my daughter liketh not marriage. Accordingly the
Wezeer returned with his attendants unsuccessful, and they continued
their journey until they went in unto the King, and acquainted him with
what had happened; and upon this he ordered the chiefs to call together
the troops that they might march to war; but the Wezeer said to him, Do
not this; for the King is not in fault: the refusal is on the part of
his daughter, who, when she knew of this proposal, sent to say, If my
father force me to marry, I will kill him whom I marry, and kill myself
after him.

And when the King heard the words of the Wezeer, he feared for his son
Taj-el-Mulook, and said, If I make war upon her father, and obtain
possession of his daughter, she will kill herself. He then acquainted
his son Taj-el-Mulook with the truth of the case; and when the prince
heard it, he said to his father, O my father, I cannot exist without
her: I will therefore go to her, and seek means of obtaining an
interview with her, though I die in the attempt: and I will do nothing
but this. His father said, How wilt thou go to her? He answered, I will
go in the disguise of a merchant.--Then if it must be so, rejoined the
King, take with thee the Wezeer and 'Azeez. He then took forth for him
some money from his treasuries, and prepared for him merchandise at the
price of a hundred thousand pieces of gold, and they both agreed as to
this course; and when night came, Taj-el-Mulook and 'Azeez went to the
abode of the latter, and there passed that night. But the heart of
Taj-el-Mulook was captivated, and neither eating nor rest pleased him:
reflections overwhelmed him, and he was drowned in them; and, longing
for his beloved, he poured forth his tears, and wept violently; and
'Azeez wept with him, reflecting upon his cousin; and they both
continued thus until the morning, when Taj-el-Mulook arose and went in
to his mother. He was equipped for the journey; and she asked him
respecting his state: so he acquainted her with the whole truth; and she
gave him fifty thousand pieces of gold, and bade him farewell, and he
went forth from her, while she offered up prayers for his safety, and
for his union with the object of his love. He then went in to his
father, and asked his permission to depart; and the King granted him
permission, and gave him fifty thousand pieces of gold, and ordered that
a tent should be pitched for him outside the city.



A large tent was therefore pitched for him; and after they had remained
in it two days, they commenced their journey; and Taj-el-Mulook treated
'Azeez with familiar kindness, and said to him, O my brother, I cannot
henceforth part with thee.--And I, replied 'Azeez, am of the like mind,
and desire to die at thy feet; but, O my brother, my heart is troubled
with thoughts of my mother. So Taj-el-Mulook said, When we shall have
attained our wish, all will be well. Now the Wezeer had charged
Taj-el-Mulook to display an air of patience, and 'Azeez occupied himself
with reciting to him verses, and narrating to him histories and tales;
and they continued on their way by night and day for the space of two
months. The length of the journey became wearisome to Taj-el-Mulook; and
the violence of his desire, and his passion and distraction, increased:
so when they drew near to the city, he rejoiced excessively, and his
anxiety and grief ceased.

They entered it in the garb of merchants, the King's son being also clad
in the same manner, and, coming to a place known as the abode of
merchants, which was a large Khan, Taj-el-Mulook said to 'Azeez, Is this
the abode of the merchants? 'Azeez answered, Yes: it is not, however,
the Khan in which I lodged with the caravan that I accompanied; but it
is better than that. So they made their camels lie down, and unloaded,
and, having deposited their goods in the magazines, remained there to
take rest four days. The Wezeer then suggested to them that they should
hire for themselves a large house; to which they assented; and they
hired a spacious house, fitted for festivities. There they took up their
abode; and the Wezeer and 'Azeez studied to devise some stratagem for
the sake of Taj-el-Mulook, who was perplexed, not knowing what to do.
The Wezeer could contrive no other plan than that of his opening for
himself a shop to carry on the trade of a merchant in the market of fine
stuffs: he therefore addressed Taj-el-Mulook and 'Azeez, and said to
them, Know that if we remain in this state we shall not attain our wish;
and a thing hath occurred to my mind which probably may be advisable, if
it be the will of God. So they replied, Do what seemeth fit to thee; for
a blessing attendeth the aged, and especially in thy case, since thou
hast devoted thyself to the management of affairs: therefore give us the
advice which hath suggested itself to thy mind. And he said to
Taj-el-Mulook, It is my opinion that we should hire for thee a shop in
the market of fine stuffs, and that thou shouldst sit in it to sell and
buy; for every person of the higher ranks and of the people in general
standeth in need of such stuffs, and if thou sit in that shop thy affair
will be arranged, if it be the will of God (whose name be exalted!),
especially because of thy comely person; but make 'Azeez thy trusty
attendant, and seat him in the shop to hand to thee the stuffs. And when
Taj-el-Mulook heard these words, he said, This is a judicious
opinion;--and immediately he took forth a suit of merchant's attire,
and clad himself in it, and arose and went forth, followed by his young
men, and gave to one of them a thousand pieces of gold to fit up the
shop.

They proceeded until they arrived at the market of fine stuffs, and when
the merchants saw Taj-el-Mulook, and observed his handsome and comely
person, they were confounded, and began to say, Hath Riwan
opened the gates of Paradise and neglected them, so that this youth of
surprising beauty hath come forth?--and one said, This is probably one
of the angels. And when they went in among the merchants, they inquired
for the shop of the Sheykh of the market. The merchants, therefore,
guided them thither, and they went to him; and as they approached him,
he and the merchants who were with him rose to them, and received them
with honour, especially the excellent Wezeer; for they saw him to be an
aged and venerable man; and observing that he was accompanied by
Taj-el-Mulook and 'Azeez, they said, No doubt this sheykh is the father
of these two young men. The Wezeer then said to them, Who among you is
the Sheykh of the market? They answered, This is he. And the Wezeer,
looking at him and observing him, saw that he was an old man of grave
and respectable aspect, and possessing servants and young men. The
Sheykh of the market greeted them with friendly compliments, and treated
them with great honour, and, having seated them by his side, said to
them, Have ye any business which we may have the happiness of
transacting? The Wezeer answered, Yes: I am an old man, advanced in age,
and I have these two young men: I have travelled with them through all
regions and countries, and have not entered a town without remaining in
it a whole year, that they might amuse themselves with the sight of it
and become acquainted with its inhabitants; and now I have come to this
your town, and have chosen to make a stay in it: I therefore desire of
thee one of the best shops, that I may seat them in it to traffic, and
that they may amuse themselves with the sight of this city, and acquire
the manners of its people, and obtain an experience in buying and
selling and other commercial transactions.

So the Sheykh of the market replied, There will be no harm in doing
so:--and, looking at the two young men, he was delighted with them, and
he arose and stood like a servant before them to wait upon them. And
afterwards he went and prepared for them the shop: it was in the midst
of the market, and there was none larger than it, nor any more handsome
there; for it was spacious and decorated, and contained shelves of
ivory and ebony. He then delivered the keys to the Wezeer (who was also
in the garb of a merchant), and said, God grant that it may be attended
with blessings to thy two sons! And when the Wezeer had
taken the keys of the shop, he went to it, together with the servants,
who deposited in it their goods; and they ordered the servants to remove
thither all the merchandise and stuffs and rarities that they had. These
things were worth treasuries of wealth; and they transported the whole
of them to the shop. They then passed the night, and in the morning the
Wezeer conducted the two young men to the bath, where they washed and
enjoyed themselves to the utmost, after which they returned to their
abode to rest from the fatigue of bathing, and ate and drank; and they
passed the next night in their abode in the most perfect joy and
happiness. And on the following morning they rose from their sleep, and,
having performed the ablution, recited the divinely-ordained prayers,
and drank their morning-beverage; and when daylight came,
and the shops and markets were opened, they went forth from their abode,
and repaired to the market, and opened the shop. The servants had
prepared it for them in the handsomest manner, and spread it with
carpets of silk, and placed in it two mattresses, each of which was
worth a hundred pieces of gold; and upon each mattress they spread a
skin such as Kings sit upon, surrounded with an edge of gold: so
Taj-el-Mulook seated himself upon one mattress, and 'Azeez upon the
other, and the Wezeer sat in the midst of the shop, while the servants
stood before them. The people heard of them, and crowded about them, and
they sold of their merchandise; and the fame of Taj-el-Mulook was spread
through the city, and the report of his handsomeness and comeliness was
blazed throughout it. They continued this life for several days, the
people pressing to them; after which the Wezeer addressed Taj-el-Mulook,
and enjoined him to conceal his case, and, having charged 'Azeez to keep
watch over him, repaired to the house to plan some mode of proceeding
that might be of advantage to them. Meanwhile, Taj-el-Mulook and 'Azeez
sat conversing together; and the former said, Perhaps some one may come
from the lady Dunya.



Thus Taj-el-Mulook passed his time days and nights, and slept not;
desire overpowered him, and he became more and more emaciated and
infirm, renouncing the delight of sleep, and abstaining from drink and
food; but still he was like the full moon: and as he was sitting one
day, lo, an old woman approached and advanced towards him, followed by
two female slaves, and she continued to draw near until she stopped at
his shop. Beholding his graceful person, and his handsome and lovely
aspect, she wondered at his beauty, and said, Extolled be the perfection
of Him who created thee! Extolled be the perfection of Him who hath made
thee a temptation to all creatures!--She ceased not to gaze at him, and
said, This is not a mortal: this is no other than a noble
angel! Then drawing close to him, she saluted him, and he
returned her salutation, and rose to her, standing upon his
feet, and smiled in her face. All this he did at the
hinting of 'Azeez; after which he seated her by his side, and occupied
himself with fanning her until she had rested herself; when she said to
him, O my son! O thou of perfect qualities and graces! art thou of this
country?--Taj-el-Mulook answered her, with an eloquent and sweet and
charming voice, By Allah, O my mistress, in my life I never entered this
country until now; and I have not taken up my abode in it but for the
sake of amusement. And she wished him honour, and welcomed him, and
said, What stuffs hast thou brought with thee? Show me something
beautiful; for the beautiful bringeth not anything but what is
beautiful.--And when Taj-el-Mulook heard her words his heart
palpitated; but he understood not their meaning: so 'Azeez made a sign
to him; and Taj-el-Mulook said to her, I have everything that thou
desirest of stuffs suitable only to Kings and the daughters of Kings.
For whom, then, wouldst thou purchase, that I may display to thee what
will be appropriate?--He desired by this question to learn the meaning
of her words; and she answered, I want some stuff suitable to the lady
Dunya, the daughter of King Shah-Zeman. On hearing the mention of his
beloved, Taj-el-Mulook rejoiced exceedingly, and said to 'Azeez, Bring
me the most magnificent of the goods that are by thee. And 'Azeez gave
him a wrapper, and untied it before her, and Taj-el-Mulook said to her,
Choose what will suit her; for this is such as is not found with any but
me. So the old woman chose some stuff that was worth a thousand pieces
of gold; and said, What is the price of this?--What! said he, shall I
bargain with a person like thee respecting this contemptible thing?
Praise be to God who hath made me acquainted with thee.--And the old
woman exclaimed, I invoke, for thy comely face, the protection of the
Lord of the Daybreak! for verily thy face is comely, and
so are thine actions. Joy be to her who possesseth thee, and especially
if she be endowed with beauty like thee!--Upon this, Taj-el-Mulook
laughed until he fell backwards, and said , O
Accomplisher of desires by the means of wicked old women!
And she said to him, O my son, what is thy name? He answered, My name is
Taj-el-Mulook.--This, she replied, is one of the names of Kings; but
thou art in the garb of the merchants. So 'Azeez said, From the
affection of his family for him, and the high estimation in which they
held him, they gave him this name. And the old woman replied, Thou hast
spoken truth. May God avert from you the evil of the envious, though
hearts be broken by your charms!

She then took the stuff, and departed, confounded by his handsomeness
and loveliness and elegant form; and she proceeded until she went in to
the lady Dunya, when she said to her, O my mistress, I have brought thee
some beautiful stuff.--Shew it me, said the lady. And she replied, O my
mistress, here it is: turn it over, and behold it. And when the lady
Dunya saw it, she said to her, O my nurse, verily this is beautiful
stuff; I have not seen such in our city!--O my mistress, replied the old
woman, the seller of it surpasseth it in beauty. It seemeth as though
Riwan had opened the gates of Paradise and neglected them, and so the
merchant who selleth this stuff had come forth from it. I wish he were
with thee; for he is a temptation to every one who beholdeth him. He
hath come to our city with these stuffs for the sake of amusement.--At
these words of the old woman the lady Dunya laughed, and said, Allah
afflict thee, thou ill-omened old woman! Thou hast spoken nonsense, and
art become insane.--She then added, Give me the stuff that I may examine
it closely. So the old woman handed it to her, and she looked at it
again, and saw that it was but little, and that its price was great; and
she wondered at its beauty; for she had never in her life seen anything
like it. The old woman then said to her, O my mistress, if thou didst
behold its owner, thou wouldst know that he is the handsomest person on
the face of the earth. And the lady Dunya said to her, Didst thou ask
him if he had any want to be performed, that he might acquaint us with
it, and thou mightest accomplish it for him? The old woman, shaking her
head, replied, Allah preserve thy sagacity! By Allah, he hath a want.
And is any person without one?--Go to him, then, said the lady Dunya,
and salute him, and say to him, I have been honoured by thine arrival in
our city, and whatever want thou hast, we will perform it for thee on
the head and the eye.

The old woman, therefore, returned immediately to Taj-el-Mulook, and
when he saw her, his heart leaped with joy, and he rose to her, standing
upon his feet, and, taking her hand, seated her by his side. So when she
had sat and rested herself, she informed him of that which the lady
Dunya had said. On hearing this, he was filled with the utmost joy; his
bosom expanded, and he said within himself, I have accomplished my wish!
He then said to the old woman, Perhaps thou wilt convey to her a letter
from me, and bring me back the answer. She replied, I hear and obey. And
when he heard her reply, he said to 'Azeez, Give me an inkhorn and
paper, and a pen of brass. And 'Azeez having given him these things, he
wrote the following verses:--

  I write to thee a letter, O object of my petition, expressive
    of the torment that I suffer from separation;
  And first, I make known to thee the ardour of my heart; and secondly,
    my desire and eager longing;
  And thirdly, the expiring of my life and patience; and fourthly,
    that all the violence of my love remaineth;
  And fifthly, I ask, When shall I behold thee? and sixthly,
    When shall be the day of our union?

He then added beneath, This letter is from the captive of desire,
incarcerated in the prison of longing expectation, to whom there can be
no liberation but by enjoying an interview, even were it with the
phantom of the object of his hope; for he is enduring a painful torment
from the separation of his beloved.--Then his tears flowed, and he wrote
these two verses:--

  I write unto thee with my tears flowing, and the drops from
    my eyes descending incessantly;
  But I am not despairing of the favour of my Lord: perhaps
    some day our union may take place.

He then folded the letter, and sealed it, and gave it to the old woman,
saying, Convey it to the lady Dunya. She replied, I hear and obey. And
he gave her a thousand pieces of gold, and said, Receive this as a
present from me. So the old woman took it and departed, praying for him.

She stopped not until she went in to the lady Dunya, who, when she
beheld her, said to her, O my nurse, what hath he demanded that we
should do for him?--O my mistress, she answered, he hath sent with me a
letter, and I know not its contents. And she handed the letter to her.
So the lady Dunya took it and read it, and understood its meaning, and
exclaimed, Whence is he, and to what doth he aspire, that this merchant
openeth a correspondence with me? Then slapping her face, she said, Were
it not for my fear of God (whose name be exalted!) I would crucify him
upon his shop. So the old woman said to her, What is in this letter,
that it hath disturbed thy heart? Doth it contain a complaint of
oppression, or a demand for the price of the stuff?--Wo to thee! she
answered: it containeth not that, nor anything but love and affection;
and all this is through thee. Or, if not, how should this devil presume
to employ these words?--O my mistress, replied the old woman, thou art
residing in thy lofty palace, and no one can obtain access to thee; not
even the flying bird. Allah preserve thee from blame and censure! Thou
hast nothing to fear from the barking of dogs. Be not angry with me for
my bringing thee this letter when I knew not its contents: but it is my
opinion that thou shouldst return him an answer, and threaten him in it
with slaughter, and forbid him from employing these vain words; for he
will abstain, and not do so again.--The lady Dunya said, I fear to write
to him, lest he covet me more. But the old woman replied, When he
heareth the threatening, and promise of punishment, he will desist from
his present conduct. So she said, Bring me an inkhorn and paper, and a
pen of brass. And when they had brought them to her, she wrote these
verses:--

  O pretender to love and affliction and sleeplessness, and feelings
    of rapturous passion, and anxiety!
  Dost thou seek for a meeting, O deceived, from a moon? Doth any
    attain from a moon his wish?
  I advise thine abstaining from thy desire: forbear then; for thou
    art exposed to peril.
  If thou again make use of these words, I will visit thee with
    a punishment of the utmost severity.
  By Him who created mankind of clotted blood,
    and who gave light to the sun and the moon!
  If thou repeat the proposal thou hast made, I will assuredly crucify
    thee on the trunk of a tree.



She then folded up the letter, and gave it to the old woman, saying to
her, Deliver it to him, and say to him, Abstain from these words. And
she replied, I hear and obey.

She took the letter, full of joy, and went with it to her
house, where she passed the night; and in the morning she repaired to
the shop of Taj-el-Mulook, whom she found expecting her. As soon as he
beheld her, he almost flew with joy, and when she drew near to him he
rose to her, standing upon his feet, and seated her by his side; and she
took forth the letter, and handed it to him, saying, Read its contents.
She then said to him, The lady Dunya, when she read thy letter, was
enraged; but I coaxed her and jested with her until I made her laugh,
and she was moved with pity for thee, and returned thee an answer. So
Taj-el-Mulook thanked her for this, and, having ordered 'Azeez to give
her a thousand pieces of gold, read the letter, and understood it; and
he wept violently, so that the heart of the old woman was moved with
compassion for him, and his weeping and complaining grieved her. She
said to him, O my son, and what is in this paper, that it hath made
thee weep? He answered, She threateneth me with slaughter and
crucifixion, and forbiddeth my writing to her; but if I write not to
her, my death will be preferable to my life; therefore take a reply to
her letter, and let her do what she will.--By thy youth, replied the old
woman, I must risk my life for thee, and enable thee to attain thy
desire, and accomplish for thee that which is in thy heart. And
Taj-el-Mulook said, Whatsoever thou dost I will requite thee for it; and
it shall be determined by thee; for thou art experienced in the
management of affairs, and skilled in the modes of intrigue, and
everything that is difficult becometh easy to thee; and God is able to
accomplish all things. So he took a paper, and wrote in it these
verses:--

  She threatened me with slaughter. O my bereavement! Slaughter
    would be ease to me, and death is decreed.
  Death is better than life prolonged to the love-smitten who is
    debarred from enjoyment and treated with oppression.
  By Allah, visit a helpless lover; for I am your slave, and the slave
    is in captivity.
  O my mistress, have mercy on me for my passion; for every one who
    loveth the virtuous is excusable.

Having done this, he sighed heavily, and wept until the old woman wept
with him; after which she took the letter from him, and said to him, Be
happy and cheerful; for I must accomplish for thee thy wish.

She then arose, and left him as though he were upon the fire, and
repaired to the lady Dunya, whom she found with a countenance changed by
her anger in consequence of the former epistle of Taj-el-Mulook; and she
handed her the second letter; whereupon her rage increased, and she said
to the old woman, Did I not tell thee that he would covet us more?--And
what is this dog, said the old woman, that he should aspire to thee? The
lady Dunya replied, Go to him, and say to him, If thou write to her
again she will strike off thy head. But the old woman said, Do thou
write this to him in a letter, and I will take it with me, that his fear
may be the greater. So she took a paper, and wrote in it the following
verses:--

  O thou who art heedless of the course of misfortunes, and who canst not
    accomplish thy desired union!
  Dost thou think, O deceived, to attain to Es-Suha, when
    thou canst not reach to the shining moon?
  How then dost thou venture to hope for our union, and to hold in thine
    embrace my javelin-like form?
  Quit, therefore, this project, in fear of my assault on a day
    of adversity when hair shall become gray.

Having folded this letter, she handed it to the old woman, who took it
and repaired with it to Taj-el-Mulook. At the sight of her he rose, and
said, May God never deprive me of the blessing of thy coming! And the
old woman replied, Receive the answer to thy letter. So he took the
paper and read it, and wept violently, and said, I desire now some one
to kill me; for slaughter would be easier to me than this my present
state of suffering. He then took an inkhorn and a pen and paper, and
wrote a letter expressed in these two verses:--

  O my hope, persist not in abandonment and cruelty; but visit
    a lover drowned in desire.
  Think not that I can survive this oppression; for my soul
    departeth at the loss of my beloved.

And he folded the letter, and gave it to the old woman, saying to her, I
have wearied thee to no purpose. And again he ordered 'Azeez to give her
a thousand pieces of gold, and said to her, O my mother, this paper must
be followed by complete union or complete separation.--O my son, she
replied, by Allah, I desire for thee nothing but good fortune: and I
wish she may be with thee; for thou art the shining moon, and she is the
rising sun; and if I do not bring you together, no profit will remain to
me in my life. I have passed my life in the practice of artifice and
deceit, until I have attained the age of ninety years; and how then
should I fail of uniting two persons in opposition to all law?

Then, having bidden him farewell, and soothed his mind, she departed,
and proceeded without stopping to the lady Dunya; but she had hidden the
paper in her hair; and when she sat down with her mistress, she
scratched her head, and said, O my mistress, perhaps thou wilt untwist
my hair; for it is a long time since I have entered the bath. So the
lady Dunya made bare her arms to the elbows, and untwisted the old
woman's hair; whereupon the paper fell from her head; and the lady
Dunya, seeing it, said, What is this paper? The old woman answered, It
seemeth that, when I was sitting at the shop of the merchant, this paper
caught to me: give it me, therefore, that I may return it to him. But
the lady Dunya opened it and read it, and understood its contents, and
exclaimed, This is a trick of thine, and were it not for the fact of thy
having reared me, I would lay violent hands upon thee this moment. God
hath afflicted me by this merchant, and all that I have experienced from
him hath been through thy means. I know not from what country this man
hath come. No one but he could ever use such boldness towards me. I
fear that this affair which hath happened to me may be discovered, and
especially since it relateth to a man who is neither of my family nor of
my equals.--The old woman then addressed her, and said, No one can utter
a word on this subject, through fear of thy power, and of the dignity of
thy father: and there will be no harm in thy returning him an answer.--O
my nurse, replied the lady Dunya, this is a devil. How hath he dared to
use these words, and feared not the power of the Sulan? I am perplexed
respecting his case; for if I give orders to kill him, it will not be
right: and if I leave him, he will increase in his boldness.--Write to
him a letter, rejoined the old woman; and perhaps he will be restrained.
She therefore demanded a paper and an inkhorn and a pen, and wrote to
him the following verses:--



  Though repeatedly rebuked, still gross ignorance inciteth thee.
    How oft shall my hand write verses to forbid thee?
  Thou increasest in eagerness after each prohibition; but I will
    only permit thee to conceal thy secret.
  Conceal then thy love, and never more utter it; for if thou utter it,
    I will not regard thee.
  If thou repeat what thou hast said, the raven of separation will
    announce thy fate:
  In a little time will death overtake thee, and thy resting-place
    be beneath the earth:
  Thou shalt leave thy family, O deceived, in sorrow, when the swords
    of love have prevented thine escape.

Having then folded the paper, she gave it to the old woman, who took it,
and went with it to Taj-el-Mulook, and gave it to him; and when he had
read it, and was convinced that she was hard-hearted, and that he could
not obtain access to her, he complained of his case to the Wezeer, and
desired his prudent counsel. The Wezeer replied, Know that there
remaineth for thee nothing that can be of avail, except thy writing to
her another letter, and invoking retribution upon her. So he said, O my
brother, O 'Azeez, write in my stead, according to thy knowledge. And
'Azeez took the paper, and wrote these verses:--

  O my Lord, by the Five Elders, deliver me; and to her
    who hath afflicted me transfer my anguish!
  For Thou knowest that I am suffering a tormenting flame, and my beloved
    hath oppressed me, and will not pity me.
  How long shall I feel tenderly to her in my affliction! And how long
    shall she tyrannize over my weakness!
  I wander in agonies never ending, and find not a person, O my Lord,
    to assist me.

'Azeez then folded the letter, and handed it to Taj-el-Mulook; and when
he had read it, it pleased him, and he gave it to the old woman.

So she took it, and repaired with it to the lady Dunya, who, as soon as
she had read it, and understood its contents, fell into a violent rage,
and exclaimed, All that hath befallen me hath been through the means of
this ill-omened old woman! And she called out to the female slaves and
eunuchs, and said, Seize this artful old woman, and beat her with your
slippers.--So they fell to beating her with their slippers until she
fainted; and when she recovered, the lady Dunya said to her, O wicked
old woman, were it not for my fear of God (whose name be exalted!) I had
killed thee. She then said to her attendants, Beat her again. And they
beat her again until she fainted; after which she ordered them to throw
her outside the door; and they dragged her along upon her face and threw
her down before the door.



When she recovered, therefore, she rose, and, walking and resting now
and then, arrived at her abode. She waited until the morning, and then
rose and proceeded to Taj-el-Mulook, whom she acquainted with all that
had befallen her; and it vexed him, and he said to her, We are grieved,
O my mother, for that which hath happened to thee: but everything is in
accordance with fate and destiny. She replied, Be happy and cheerful;
for I will not cease my endeavours until I procure thee an interview
with her, and obtain for thee access to this vile woman who hath
tortured me with beating. Taj-el-Mulook then said to her, Acquaint me
with the cause of her hatred of men. She replied, It is in consequence
of her having had a dream.--And what was that dream? he asked. She
answered, She was sleeping one night, and saw a fowler who set his snare
upon the ground, and sprinkled around it some wheat, and then seated
himself near it; and there was not a single bird near it but it came to
that snare. And she saw, among the birds, two pigeons, a male and a
female; and while she was looking at the snare, the foot of the male
bird became entangled in it, and he began to struggle; whereupon all the
other birds flew away from him in alarm; but his mate returned to him,
and flew around over him, and then, alighting upon the snare, while the
fowler was inadvertent, began to peck at the mesh in which was the foot
of the male, and pulled it with her beak, until she liberated his foot;
and she flew away with him. Then, after this, the fowler came and
readjusted the snare, and seated himself at a distance from it; and but
a little while had elapsed when the birds descended, and the snare
caught the female pigeon; upon which all the other birds flew away in
alarm, and among them the male pigeon, who returned not to his mate: so
the fowler came and took the female bird, and killed her. And the lady
Dunya awoke terrified by her dream, and said, Every male is like this,
destitute of good; and men universally are devoid of goodness to
women.--And when the old woman had finished her story to Taj-el-Mulook,
he said to her, O my mother, I wish to obtain one glance at her, though
my death be the consequence: contrive, therefore, some stratagem for me,
that I may see her.--Know, then, said she, that she hath a garden
adjacent to her palace, for her diversion, and she goeth out into it
once in every month, from the private door, and remaineth in it ten
days. The time of her thus going forth to divert herself hath now
arrived, and when she is about to do so I will come to thee and inform
thee, that thou mayest go thither and meet her; and do thou take care
not to quit the garden: for probably, if she behold thy handsome and
comely aspect, her heart will be captivated by love of thee; since love
is the most powerful means of effecting union.

He replied, I hear and obey:--and he arose, and quitted the shop with
'Azeez, and they both, taking with them the old woman, repaired to their
abode, and acquainted her with it; after which, Taj-el-Mulook said to
'Azeez, O my brother, I have no further want of the shop; for I have
accomplished the purpose for which I took it; and I give it to thee,
with all that it containeth, because thou hast come abroad with me, and
absented thyself from thy country. And 'Azeez accepted his present, and
they sat conversing together; Taj-el-Mulook asking him respecting his
strange adventures, and 'Azeez relating what had happened to him. Then,
addressing the Wezeer, they acquainted him with the purpose of
Taj-el-Mulook, and asked him, What is to be done? He answered, Let us go
to the garden. So each of them clad himself in the richest of his
apparel, and they went forth, followed by three memlooks, and repaired
to the garden. They beheld it abounding with trees, and with many
rivulets, and saw the superintendent sitting at the gate. They saluted
him, therefore, and he returned their salutation, and the Wezeer handed
to him a hundred pieces of gold, saying to him, I beg thee to receive
this money, and to buy for us something to eat; for we are strangers,
and I have with me these children whom I wish to divert. So the gardener
took the pieces of gold, and replied, Enter, and divert yourselves; for
the whole of it is your property: and sit down until I return to you
with something for you to eat. He then went to the market, and the
Wezeer and Taj-el-Mulook and 'Azeez entered the garden after the
gardener had departed to the market; and soon the latter returned,
bringing a roasted lamb, which he placed before them. And they ate, and
washed their hands, and sat conversing together; and the Wezeer said,
Inform me respecting this garden: doth it belong to thee, or dost thou
rent it? The sheykh replied, It is not mine, but belongeth to the King's
daughter, the lady Dunya.--And what, said the Wezeer, is thy monthly
salary? He answered, One piece of gold, and no more. And the Wezeer,
taking a view of the garden, beheld there a lofty but old pavilion; and
he said, O sheykh, I desire to perform here a good work by which thou
wilt be reminded of me.--And what good thing dost thou desire to do?
asked the sheykh. The Wezeer said, Take these three hundred pieces of
gold. And when the superintendent heard the mention of the gold, he
replied, O my master, do whatsoever thou wilt. So he took the pieces of
gold; and the Wezeer said to him, If it be the will of God (whose name
be exalted!), we will execute in this place a good work.

They then went forth from him, and returned to their abode, and passed
the next night; and on the morrow, the Wezeer caused a whitewasher to be
brought, and a painter, and an excellent goldsmith; and, having provided
them with all the implements that they required, introduced them into
the garden, and ordered them to whitewash that pavilion and to decorate
it with various kinds of paintings. After which he gave orders to bring
the gold, and the ultramarine pigment, and said to the painter,
Delineate, at the upper end of this saloon, the figure of a fowler, as
though he had set his snare, and a female pigeon had fallen into it, and
had become entangled in it by her bill. And when the painter had
finished his picture on one portion, the Wezeer said to him, Now paint,
on this other portion, as before, and represent the female pigeon in the
snare, and shew that the fowler hath taken her, and put the knife to her
neck; and on the other side paint the figure of a great bird of prey,
that hath captured the male pigeon, and fixed his talons into him. So he
did this; and when he had finished these designs which the Wezeer had
described to him, they took leave of the gardener, and returned to their
abode.

There they sat conversing together; and Taj-el-Mulook said to 'Azeez, O
my brother, recite to me some verses: perhaps my heart may thereby be
dilated, and these troubling reflections may be dispelled, and the flame
that is in my heart be quenched. And upon this, 'Azeez, with charming
modulations, chanted these verses:--

  Ibn-Seena hath asserted that the lover's remedy
    consisteth in melodious sounds,
  And the company of one like his beloved, and the pleasures
    of a dessert and wine and a garden:
  But I have taken another in thy stead to cure myself, and fate
    and contingency aided me:
  Yet I found that love was a mortal disease, for which Ibn-Seena's
    medicine was vain.

Meanwhile, the old woman remained alone in her house; and the lady Dunya
longed to divert herself in the garden; but she used not to go forth
save with the old woman: so she sent to her, and conciliated her, and
soothed her mind, and said to her, I desire to go out into the garden,
to amuse myself with the sight of its trees and fruits, and that my
heart may be dilated by its flowers. The old woman replied, I hear and
obey; but I would first go to my house and dress myself, and I will be
with thee again.--Go, then, to thy house, rejoined the lady Dunya; but
be not long absent from me. The old woman, therefore, went forth from
her, and repaired to Taj-el-Mulook, and said to him, Make ready, and
clothe thyself in the richest of thine apparel, and betake thyself to
the garden, and go in to the gardener and salute him, and then conceal
thyself in the garden. He replied, I hear and obey. And she agreed with
him respecting a sign to be made; after which she returned to the lady
Dunya. And when she had gone, the Wezeer arose, and clad Taj-el-Mulook
in a suit of the most magnificent of the apparel of Kings, worth five
thousand pieces of gold, and girded him with a girdle of gold set with
jewels, and repaired to the garden. On arriving at its gate, they found
the superintendent sitting there; and when he saw Taj-el-Mulook, he rose
to him, standing upon his feet, and, receiving him with reverence and
honour, opened to him the gate, and said to him, Enter, and divert
thyself in the garden. But the gardener knew not that the King's
daughter would enter the garden that day. And when Taj-el-Mulook had
gone in, he waited but a short time, and heard a noise; and before he
knew the cause, the eunuchs and female slaves came forth from the
private door; and as soon as the superintendent beheld them, he went and
acquainted Taj-el-Mulook with their coming, saying to him, O my lord,
what is to be done, now that the King's daughter, the lady Dunya, hath
come? He answered, No harm will befall thee; for I will conceal myself
in some place in the garden. So the gardener charged him to use the
utmost caution in concealing himself, and left him, and departed.