Thus ended the story of Zaleukos, the Grecian merchant. With great
interest had the others listened; the stranger, in particular, seemed
to be wrapt up in it: more than once he had drawn a deep sigh, and
Muley looked as if he had had tears in his eyes. No one spoke for some
time after the recital.

"And hate you not the Unknown, who so basely cost you a noble member
of your body, and even put your life in danger?" inquired Selim.

"Perhaps there were hours at first," answered the Greek, "in which my
heart accused him before God, of having brought this misfortune upon
me, and embittered my life; but I found consolation in the religion of
my fathers, which commanded me to love my enemies. Moreover, he
probably is more unhappy than myself."

"You are a noble man!" exclaimed Selim, cordially pressing the hand of
the Greek.

The leader of the escort, however, here interrupted their
conversation. He came with a troubled air into the tent, and told them
that they could not give themselves up to repose, for this was the
place in which Caravans were usually attacked, and his guards imagined
they had seen several horsemen in the distance.

The merchants were confounded at this intelligence. Selim, the
stranger, however, expressed wonder at their alarm, saying they were
so well escorted they need not fear a troop of Arabian robbers.

"Yes, sir," rejoined to him the leader of the guard; "were he only a
common outlaw, we could compose ourselves to rest without anxiety; but
for some time back, the frightful Orbasan has shown himself again, and
it is well to be upon our guard."

The stranger inquired who this Orbasan was, and Achmet, the old
merchant, answered him:--

"Various rumors are current among the people with respect to this
wonderful man. Some hold him to be a supernatural being, because, with
only five or six men, he has frequently fallen upon a whole
encampment; others regard him as a bold Frenchman, whom misfortune has
driven into this region: out of all this, however, thus much alone is
certain, that he is an abandoned robber and highwayman."

"That can you not prove," answered Lezah, one of the merchants.
"Robber as he is, he is still a noble man, and such has he shown
himself to my brother, as I can relate to you. He has formed his
whole band of well-disciplined men, and as long as he marches through
the desert, no other band ventures to show itself. Moreover, he robs
not as others, but only exacts a tribute from the caravans; whoever
willingly pays this, proceeds without further danger, for Orbasan is
lord of the wilderness!"

Thus did the travellers converse together in the tent; the guards,
however, who were stationed around the resting-place, began to become
uneasy. A tolerably large band of armed horsemen showed themselves at
the distance of half a league. They appeared to be riding straight to
the encampment; one of the guard came into the tent, to inform them
that they would probably be attacked.



The merchants consulted among themselves as to what they should do,
whether to march against them, or await the attack. Achmet and the two
elder merchants inclined to the latter course; the fiery Muley,
however, and Zaleukos desired the former, and summoned the stranger to
their assistance. He, however, quietly drew forth from his girdle a
little blue cloth spangled with red stars, bound it upon a lance,
and commanded one of the slaves to plant it in front of the tent: he
would venture his life upon it, he said, that the horsemen, when they
saw this signal, would quietly march back again. Muley trusted not the
result; still the slave put out the lance in front of the tent.
Meanwhile all in the camp had seized their weapons, and were looking
upon the horsemen in eager expectation. The latter, however, appeared
to have espied the signal; they suddenly swerved from their direct
course towards the encampment, and, in a large circle, moved off to
the side.

Struck with wonder, the travellers stood some moments, gazing
alternately at the horsemen and the stranger. The latter stood in
front of the tent quite indifferently, as though nothing had happened,
looking upon the plain before him. At last Muley broke the silence.

"Who art thou, mighty stranger," he exclaimed, "that restrainest with
a glance the wild hordes of the desert?"

"You rate my art higher than it deserves," answered Selim Baruch. "I
observed this signal when I fled from captivity; what it means, I know
not--only this much I know, that whoever travels with this sign, is
under great protection."

The merchants thanked the stranger, and called him their preserver;
indeed, the number of the robbers was so great, that the Caravan could
not, probably, for any length of time, have offered an effectual
resistance.

With lighter hearts they now gave themselves to sleep; and when the
sun began to sink, and the evening wind to pass over the sand-plain,
they struck their tents, and marched on. The next day they halted
safely, only one day's journey from the entrance of the desert. When
the travellers had once more collected in the large tent, Lezah, the
merchant, took up the discourse.

"I told you, yesterday, that the dreaded Orbasan was a noble man;
permit me to prove it to you, to-day, by the relation of my brother's
adventure. My father was Cadi of Acara. He had three children; I was
the eldest, my brother and sister being much younger than myself. When
I was twenty years old, a brother of my father took me under his
protection; he made me heir to his property, on condition that I
should remain with him until his death. He however had reached an old
age, so that before two years I returned to my native land, having
known nothing, before, of the misfortune which had meanwhile fallen
upon my family, and how Allah had turned it to advantage."