THE STORY TOLD BY THE SULAN'S STEWARD.

I was last night with a party who celebrated a recitation of the
ur-an, for which purpose they had assembled the professors
of religion and law; and when these reciters had accomplished their
task, the servants spread a repast, comprising among other dishes a
zirbajeh. We approached, therefore, to eat of the zirbajeh;
but one of the company drew back, and refused to partake of it: we
conjured him; yet he swore that he would not eat of it: and we pressed
him again; but he said, Press me not; for I have suffered enough from
eating of this dish. And when we had finished, we said to him, By Allah,
tell us the reason of thine abstaining from eating of this zirbajeh. He
replied, Because I cannot eat of it unless I wash my hands forty times
with kali, and forty times with cyperus, and forty times with soap;
altogether, a hundred and twenty times. And upon this, the giver of the
entertainment ordered his servants, and they brought water and the other
things which this man required: so he washed his hands as he had
described, and advanced, though with disgust, and, having seated
himself, stretched forth his hand as one in fear, and put it into the
zirbajeh, and began to eat, while we regarded him with the utmost
wonder. His hand trembled, and when he put it forth, we saw that his
thumb was cut off, and that he ate with his four fingers: we therefore
said to him, We conjure thee, by Allah, to tell us how was thy thumb
maimed: was it thus created by God, or hath some accident happened to
it?--O my brothers, he answered, not only have I lost this thumb, but
also the thumb of the other hand; and each of my feet is in like manner
deprived of the great toe: but see ye:--and, so saying, he uncovered the
stump of the thumb of his other hand, and we found it like the right;
and so also his feet, destitute of the great toes. At the sight of this,
our wonder increased, and we said to him, We are impatient to hear thy
story, and thine account of the cause of the amputation of thy thumbs
and great toes, and the reason of thy washing thy hands a hundred and
twenty times. So he said,--

Know that my father was a great merchant, the chief of the merchants of
the city of Baghdad in the time of the Khaleefeh Haroon Er-Rasheed; but
he was ardently addicted to the drinking of wine, and hearing the lute;
and when he died, he left nothing. I buried him, and caused recitations
of the ur-an to be performed for him, and, after I had mourned for him
days and nights, I opened his shop, and found that he had left in it but
few goods, and that his debts were many: however, I induced his
creditors to wait, and calmed their minds, and betook myself to selling
and buying from week to week, and so paying the creditors.

Thus I continued to do for a considerable period, until I had discharged
all the debts and increased my capital; and as I was sitting one day, I
beheld a young lady, than whom my eye had never beheld any more
beautiful, decked with magnificent ornaments and apparel, riding on a
mule, with a slave before her and a slave behind her; and she stopped
the mule at the entrance of the market-street, and entered, followed by
a eunuch, who said to her, O my mistress, enter, but inform no one who
thou art, lest thou open the fire of indignation upon us. The eunuch
then further cautioned her; and when she looked at the shops of the
merchants, she found none more handsome than mine; so, when she arrived
before me, with the eunuch following her, she sat down upon the seat of
my shop, and saluted me; and I never heard speech more charming than
hers, or words more sweet. She then drew aside the veil from her face,
and I directed at her a glance which drew from me a sigh; my heart was
captivated by her love, and I continued repeatedly gazing at her face,
and recited these two verses:--

  Say to the beauty in the dove-coloured veil, Death would indeed
    be welcome to relieve me from thy torment.
  Favour me with a visit, that so I may live. See, I stretch forth
    my hand to accept thy liberality.

And when she had heard my recitation of them, she answered thus:--

  May I lose my heart if it cease to love you! For verily my heart
    loveth none but you.
  If my eye regard any charms but yours, may the sight of you never
    rejoice it after absence!

She then said to me, O youth, hast thou any handsome stuffs?--O my
mistress, I answered, thy slave is a poor man; but wait until the other
merchants open their shops, and then I will bring thee what thou
desirest. So I conversed with her, drowned in the sea of her love, and
bewildered by my passion for her, until the merchants had opened their
shops, when I arose, and procured all that she wanted, and the price of
these stuffs was five thousand pieces of silver: and she handed them all
to the eunuch, who took them; after which, they both went out from the
market-street, and the slaves brought to her the mule, and she mounted,
without telling me whence she was, and I was ashamed to mention the
subject to her: consequently, I became answerable for the price to the
merchants, incurring a debt of five thousand pieces of silver.

I went home, intoxicated with her love, and they placed before me the
supper, and I ate a morsel; but reflections upon her beauty and
loveliness prevented my eating more. I desired to sleep, but sleep came
not to me; and in this condition I remained for a week. The merchants
demanded of me their money; but I prevailed upon them to wait another
week; and after this week, the lady came again, riding upon a mule, and
attended by a eunuch and two other slaves; and, having saluted me, said,
O my master, we have been tardy in bringing to thee the price of the
stuffs: bring now the money-changer, and receive it. So the
money-changer came, and the eunuch gave him the money, and I took it,
and sat conversing with her until the market was replenished, and the
merchants opened their shops, when she said to me, Procure for me such
and such things. Accordingly, I procured for her what she desired of the
merchants, and she took the goods and departed without saying anything
to me respecting the price. When she had gone, therefore, I repented of
what I had done; for I had procured for her what she demanded for the
price of a thousand pieces of gold; and as soon as she had disappeared
from my sight, I said within myself, What kind of love is this? She hath
brought me five thousand pieces of silver, and taken goods for a
thousand pieces of gold!--I feared that the result would be my
bankruptcy, and the loss of the property of others, and said, The
merchants know none but me, and this woman is no other than a cheat, who
hath imposed upon me by her beauty and loveliness: seeing me to be
young, she hath laughed at me, and I asked her not where was her
residence.



I remained in a state of perplexity, and her absence was prolonged more
than a month. Meanwhile the merchants demanded of me their money, and so
pressed me that I offered my possessions for sale, and was on the brink
of ruin; but as I was sitting absorbed in reflection, suddenly she
alighted at the gate of the market-street, and came in to me. As soon as
I beheld her, my solicitude ceased, and I forgot the trouble which I had
suffered. She approached, and addressed me with her agreeable
conversation, and said, Produce the scales, and weigh thy money:--and
she gave me the price of the goods which she had taken, with a surplus;
after which, she amused herself by talking with me, and I almost died
with joy and happiness. She then said to me, Hast thou a wife? I
answered, No: for I am not acquainted with any woman:--and wept. So she
asked me, What causeth thee to weep? And I answered, A thought that hath
come into my mind:--and, taking some pieces of gold, gave them to the
eunuch, requesting him to grant me his mediation in the affair; upon
which he laughed, and said, She is in love with thee more than thou art
with her, and hath no want of the stuffs, but hath done this only from
her love of thee: propose to her, therefore, what thou wilt; for she
will not oppose thee in that which thou wilt say. Now she observed me
giving the pieces of gold to the eunuch, and returned, and resumed her
seat; and I said to her, Shew favour to thy slave, and pardon me for
that which I am about to say. I then acquainted her with the feelings of
my heart, and my declaration pleased her, and she consented to my
proposal, saying, This eunuch will come with my letter; and do thou what
he shall tell thee;--and she arose, and departed.

I went to the merchants, and delivered to them their money, and all
profited except myself; for when she left me I mourned for the
interruption of our intercourse, and I slept not during the whole of the
next night: but a few days after, her eunuch came to me, and I received
him with honour, and asked him respecting his mistress. He answered, She
is sick:--and I said to him, Disclose to me her history. He replied, The
lady Zubeydeh, the wife of Haroon Er-Rasheed, brought up this damsel,
and she is one of her slaves: she had desired of her mistress to be
allowed the liberty of going out and returning at pleasure, and the
latter gave her permission: she continued, therefore, to do so until she
became a chief confident; after which, she spoke of thee to her
mistress, and begged that she would marry her to thee: but her mistress
said, I will not do it until I see this young man, and if he have a
desire for thee, I will marry thee to him. We therefore wish to
introduce thee immediately into the palace; and if thou enter without
any one's having knowledge of thy presence, thou wilt succeed in
accomplishing thy marriage with her; but if thy plot be discovered, thy
head will be struck off. What, then, sayest thou?--I answered, Good: I
will go with thee, and await the event that shall befall me there.--As
soon, then, as this next night shall have closed in, said the eunuch,
repair to the mosque which the lady Zubeydeh hath built on the bank of
the Tigris, and there say thy prayers, and pass the night.--Most
willingly, I replied.

Accordingly, when the time of nightfall arrived, I went to the mosque,
and said my prayers there, and passed the night; and as soon as the
morning began to dawn, I saw two eunuchs approaching in a small boat,
conveying some empty chests, which they brought into the mosque. One of
them then departed, and the other remained; and I looked attentively at
him, and lo, it was he who had been our intermediary: and soon after,
the damsel, my companion, came up to us. I rose to her when she
approached, and embraced her; and she kissed me, and wept: and after we
had conversed together for a little while, she took me and placed me in
a chest, and locked it upon me. The slaves then brought a
quantity of stuffs, and filled with them the other chests, which they
locked, and conveyed, together with the chest in which I was enclosed,
to the boat, accompanied by the damsel; and having embarked them, they
plied the oars, and proceeded to the palace of the honoured lady
Zubeydeh. The intoxication of love now ceased in me, and reflection came
in its place: I repented of what I had done, and prayed God to deliver
me from my dangerous predicament.



Meanwhile, they arrived at the gate of the Khaleefeh, where they landed,
and took out all the chests, and conveyed them into the palace: but the
chief of the door-keepers, who had been asleep when they arrived, was
awoke by the sounds of their voices, and cried out to the damsel,
saying, The chests must be opened, that I may see what is in them:--and
he arose, and placed his hand upon the chest in which I was hidden. My
reason abandoned me, my heart almost burst from my body, and my limbs
trembled; but the damsel said, These are the chests of the lady
Zubeydeh, and if thou open them and turn them over, she will be incensed
against thee, and we shall all perish. They contain nothing but clothes
dyed of various colours, except this chest upon which thou hast put thy
hand, in which there are also some bottles filled with the water of
Zemzem, and if any of the water run out upon the clothes it
will spoil their colours. Now I have advised thee, and it is for thee to
decide: so do what thou wilt.--When he heard, therefore, these words, he
said to her, Take the chests, and pass on:--and the eunuchs immediately
took them up, and, with the damsel, conveyed them into the palace: but
in an instant, I heard a person crying out, and saying, The Khaleefeh!
The Khaleefeh!

I was bereft of my reason, and seized with a colick from excessive fear;
I almost died, and my limbs were affected with a violent shaking. The
Khaleefeh cried out to the damsel, saying to her, What are these chests?
She answered, O my lord (may God exalt thy dominion!), these chests
contain clothes of my mistress Zubeydeh.--Open them, said the
Khaleefeh, that I may see the clothes.--When I heard this, I felt sure
of my destruction. The damsel could not disobey his command; but she
replied, O Prince of the Faithful, there is nothing in these chests but
clothes of the lady Zubeydeh, and she hath commanded me not to open them
to any one. The Khaleefeh, however, said, The chests must be opened, all
of them, that I may see their contents:--and immediately he called out
to the eunuchs to bring them before him. I therefore felt certain that I
was on the point of destruction. They then brought before him chest
after chest, and opened each to him, and he examined the contents; and
when they brought forward the chest in which I was enclosed, I bade
adieu to life, and prepared myself for death; but as the eunuchs were
about to open it, the damsel said, O Prince of the Faithful, verily this
chest containeth things especially appertaining to women; and it is
proper, therefore, that it should be opened before the lady
Zubeydeh:--and when the Khaleefeh heard her words, he ordered the
eunuchs to convey all the chests into the interior of the palace. The
damsel then hastened, and ordered two eunuchs to carry away the chest in
which I was hidden, and they took it to an inner chamber, and went their
way: whereupon she quickly opened it, and made a sign to me to come out:
so I did as she desired, and entered a closet that was before me, and
she locked the door upon me, and closed the chest: and when the eunuchs
had brought in all the chests, and had gone back, she opened the door of
the closet, and said, Thou hast nothing to fear! May God refresh thine
eye! Come forth now, and go up with me, that thou mayest have the
happiness of kissing the ground before the lady Zubeydeh.

I therefore went with her, and beheld twenty other female slaves,
high-bosomed virgins, and among them was the lady Zubeydeh, who was
scarcely able to walk from the weight of the robes and ornaments with
which she was decked. As she approached, the female slaves dispersed
from around her, and I advanced to her, and kissed the ground before
her. She made a sign to me to sit down: so I seated myself before her;
and she began to ask me questions respecting my condition and lineage;
to all of which I gave such answers that she was pleased, and said, By
Allah, the care which we have bestowed on the education of this damsel
hath not been in vain. She then said to me, Know that this damsel is
esteemed by us as though she were really our child, and she is a trust
committed to thy care by God. Upon this, therefore, I again kissed the
ground before her, well pleased to marry the damsel; after which, she
commanded me to remain with them ten days. Accordingly, I continued with
them during this period; but I knew nothing meanwhile of the damsel;
certain of the maids only bringing me my dinner and supper, as my
servants. After this, however, the lady Zubeydeh asked permission of her
husband, the Prince of the Faithful, to marry her maid, and he granted
her request, and ordered that ten thousand pieces of gold should be
given to her.



The lady Zubeydeh, therefore, sent for the aee and witnesses, and
they wrote my contract of marriage to the damsel; and the maids then
prepared sweetmeats and exquisite dishes, and distributed them in all
the apartments. Thus they continued to do for a period of ten more days;
and after the twenty days had passed, they conducted the damsel into the
bath, preparatively to my being introduced to her as her husband. They
then brought to me a repast comprising a basin of zirbajeh sweetened
with sugar, perfumed with rose-water infused with musk, and containing
different kinds of fricandoed fowls and a variety of other ingredients,
such as astonished the mind; and, by Allah, when this repast was
brought, I instantly commenced upon the zirbajeh, and ate of it as much
as satisfied me, and wiped my hand, but forgot to wash it. I remained
sitting until it became dark; when the maids lighted the candles, and
the singing-girls approached with the tambourines, and they continued to
display the bride, and to give presents of gold, until she had
perambulated the whole of the palace; after which, they brought her to
me, and disrobed her; and as soon as I was left alone with her, I threw
my arms around her neck, scarcely believing in our union: but as I did
so, she perceived the smell of the zirbajeh from my hand, and
immediately uttered a loud cry: whereupon the female slaves ran in to
her from every quarter.

I was violently agitated, not knowing what was the matter; and the
slaves who had come in said to her, What hath happened to thee, O our
sister?--Take away from me, she exclaimed to them, this madman, whom I
imagined to be a man of sense!--What indication of my insanity hath
appeared to thee? I asked. Thou madman, said she, wherefore hast thou
eaten of the zirbajeh, and not washed thy hand? By Allah, I will not
accept thee for thy want of sense, and thy disgusting conduct!--And so
saying, she took from her side a whip, and beat me with it
upon my back until I became insensible from the number of the stripes.
She then said to the other maids, Take him to the magistrate of the city
police, that he may cut off his hand with which he ate the zirbajeh
without washing it afterwards. On hearing this, I exclaimed, There is no
strength nor power but in God! Wilt thou cut off my hand on account of
my eating a zirbajeh and neglecting to wash it?--And the maids who were
present entreated her, saying to her, O our sister, be not angry with
him for what he hath done this time. But she replied, By Allah, I must
cut off something from his extremities! And immediately she departed,
and was absent from me ten days: after which, she came again, and said
to me, O thou black-faced! Am I not worthy of thee? How didst thou dare
to eat the zirbajeh and not wash thy hand?--And she called to the maids,
who bound my hands behind me, and she took a sharp razor, and cut off
both my thumbs and both my great toes, as ye see, O companions; and I
swooned away. She then sprinkled upon my wounds some powder, by means of
which the blood was stanched; and I said, I will not eat of a zirbajeh
as long as I live unless I wash my hands forty times with kali and forty
times with cyperus and forty times with soap:--and she exacted of me an
oath that I would not eat of this dish unless I washed my hands as I
have described to you. Therefore, when this zirbajeh was brought, my
colour changed, and I said within myself, This was the cause of the
cutting off of my thumbs and great toes:--so, when ye compelled me, I
said, I must fulfil the oath which I have sworn.

I then said to him (continued the Sulan's steward), And what happened
to thee after that? He answered, When I had thus sworn to her, she was
appeased, and I was admitted into her favour; and we lived happily
together for a considerable time: after which she said, The people of
the Khaleefeh's palace know not that thou hast resided here with me,
and no strange man beside thee hath entered it; nor didst thou enter but
through the assistance of the lady Zubeydeh. She then gave me fifty
thousand pieces of gold, and said to me, Take these pieces of gold, and
go forth and buy for us a spacious house. So I went forth, and purchased
a handsome and spacious house, and removed thither all the riches that
she possessed, and all that she had treasured up, and her dresses and
rarities.--This was the cause of the amputation of my thumbs and great
toes.--So we ate (said the Sulan's steward), and departed; and after
this, the accident with the humpback happened to me: this is all my
story; and peace be on thee.



The King said, This is not more pleasant than the story of the humpback:
nay, the story of the humpback is more pleasant than this; and ye must
all of you be crucified.--The Jew, however, then came forward, and,
having kissed the ground, said, O King of the age, I will relate to thee
a story more wonderful than that of the humpback:--and the King said,
Relate thy story. So he commenced thus:--