THE BARBER'S STORY OF HIS FOURTH BROTHER.

My fourth brother, O Prince of the Faithful, was the one-eyed (named
El-Kooz el-Awanee): he was a butcher in Baghdad, and both sold meat and
reared lambs; and the great and the rich had recourse to him to purchase
of him their meat; so that he amassed great wealth, and became possessor
of cattle and houses. Thus he continued to prosper for a long time; and
as he was in his shop, one day, there accosted him an old man with a
long beard, who handed to him some money, saying, Give me some meat for
it. So he took the money, and gave him the meat; and when the old man
had gone away, my brother looked at the money which he had payed him,
and, seeing that it was of a brilliant whiteness, put it aside by
itself. This old man continued to repair to him during a period of five
months, and my brother always threw his money into a chest by itself;
after which period he desired to take it out for the purpose of buying
some sheep; but on opening the chest, he found all the contents
converted into white paper, clipped round; and he slapped his face, and
cried out; whereupon a number of people collected around him, and he
related to them his story, at which they were astonished.

He then went again, as usual, into his shop, and, having killed a ram,
and hung it up within the shop, he cut off some of the meat, and
suspended it outside, saying within himself, Perhaps now this old man
will come again, and if so, I will seize him:--and very soon after, the
old man approached with his money; upon which my brother arose, and,
laying hold upon him, began to cry out, O Muslims, come to my aid, and
hear what this scoundrel hath done unto me! But when the old man heard
his words, he said to him, Which will be more agreeable to thee--that
thou abstain from disgracing me, or that I disgrace thee, before the
people?--For what wilt thou disgrace me? said my brother. The old man
answered, For thy selling human flesh for mutton.--Thou liest, thou
accursed! exclaimed my brother.--None is accursed, rejoined the old man,
but he who hath a man suspended in his shop. My brother said, If it be
as thou hast asserted, my property and blood shall be lawful to
thee:--and immediately the old man exclaimed, O ye people here
assembled! verily this butcher slaughtereth human beings, and selleth
their flesh for mutton; and if ye desire to know the truth of my
assertion, enter his shop! So the people rushed upon his shop, and
beheld the ram converted into a man, hung up; and they laid hold upon my
brother, crying out against him, Thou infidel! Thou scoundrel!--and
those who had been his dearest friends turned upon him and beat him; and
the old man gave him a blow upon his eye, and knocked it out. The people
then carried the carcass, and took with them my brother, to the chief
magistrate of the police; and the old man said to him, O Emeer, this man
slaughtereth human beings, and selleth their flesh for mutton; and we
have therefore brought him to thee: arise, then, and perform the
requisition of God, whose might and glory be extolled! Upon this, the
magistrate thrust back my brother from him, and, refusing to listen to
what he would have said, ordered that five hundred blows of a staff
should be inflicted upon him, and took all his property. Had it not been
for the great amount of his wealth, he had put him to death.
He then banished him from the city.

My brother, therefore, went forth in a state of distraction, not knowing
what course to pursue; but he journeyed onwards until he arrived at a
great city, where he thought fit to settle as a shoemaker: so he opened
a shop, and sat there working for his subsistence. And one day he went
forth on some business, and, hearing the neighing of horses, he inquired
respecting the cause, and was told that the King was going forth to
hunt; whereupon he went to amuse himself with the sight of the
procession: but the King happening to look on one side, his eye met that
of my brother, and immediately he hung down his head, and exclaimed, I
seek refuge with God from the evil of this day! He then turned aside the
bridle of his horse, and rode back, and all his troops returned with
him; after which, he ordered his pages to run after my brother, and to
beat him; and they did so, giving him so severe a beating that he
almost died; and he knew not the cause. He returned to his abode in a
miserable plight, and afterwards went and related his misfortune to one
of the King's attendants, who laughed at the recital until he fell
backwards, and said to him, O my brother, the King cannot endure the
sight of a one-eyed person, and especially when the defect is that of
the left eye; for in this case, he faileth not to put the
person to death.

When my brother heard these words, he determined to fly from that city;
and forthwith departed from it, and repaired to another city, where
there was no King. Here he remained a long time; and after this, as he
was meditating upon his adventure in the former city, he went out one
day to amuse himself, and heard again the neighing of horses behind him;
upon which he exclaimed, The decree of God hath come to pass! and ran
away, seeking for a place in which to conceal himself; but he found
none, until, continuing his search, he saw a door set up as a barricade:
so he pushed this, and it fell down; and, entering the doorway, he
beheld a long passage, into which he advanced. Suddenly, however, two
men laid hold upon him, and exclaimed, Praise be to God who hath enabled
us to take thee, O thou enemy of God! For these three nights thou hast
suffered us to enjoy neither quiet nor sleep, and we have found no
repose: nay, thou hast given us a foretaste of death!--O men, said my
brother, what hath happened unto you? They answered, Thou keepest a
watch upon us, and desirest to disgrace us, and to disgrace the master
of the house! Is it not enough for thee that thou hast reduced him to
poverty, thou and thy companions? Produce now the knife wherewith thou
threatenest us every night.--And so saying, they searched him, and found
upon his waist the knife with which he cut the shoe-leather.--O men, he
exclaimed, fear God in your treatment of me, and know that my story is
wonderful. They said, What then is thy story? So he related it to them,
in the hope that they would liberate him: but they believed not what he
said; and, instead of shewing him any regard, they beat him, and tore
his clothes; whereupon, his body becoming exposed to their view, they
discovered upon his sides the marks of beating with mira'ahs, and
exclaimed, O wretch! these scars bear testimony to thy guilt. They then
conducted him before the Walee, while he said within himself, I am
undone for my transgressions, and none can deliver me but God, whose
name be exalted! And when he was brought before the Walee, the
magistrate said to him, O thou scoundrel! nothing but a heinous crime
hath occasioned thy having been beaten with mira'ahs:--and he caused a
hundred lashes to be inflicted upon him; after which, they mounted him
upon a camel, and proclaimed before him, This is the recompense of him
who breaketh into men's houses!--But I had already heard of his
misfortunes, and gone forth, and found him; and I accompanied him about
the city while they were making this proclamation, until they left him;
when I took him, and brought him back secretly into Baghdad, and
apportioned him a daily allowance of food and drink.