The following morning, as soon as she had put the house in order, the
girl sat down to spin. Two hours after there arrived some soldiers, and
when they saw her spinning they seized her, tied her arms and legs,
and carried her to the bank of the river, which was swollen by the late
rains.

When they reached the bank they flung her in, and watched her sink,
after which they left her. But Renelde rose to the surface, and though
she could not swim she struggled to land.

Directly she got home she sat down and began to spin.

Again came the two soldiers to the cottage and seized the girl, carried
her to the river bank, tied a stone to her neck and flung her into the
water.

The moment their backs were turned the stone untied itself. Renelde
waded the ford, returned to the hut, and sat down to spin.

This time the Count resolved to go to Locquignol himself; but, as he
was very weak and unable to walk, he had himself borne in a litter. And
still the spinner spun.

When he saw her he fired a shot at her, as he would have fired at a wild
beast. The bullet rebounded without harming the spinner, who still spun
on.

Burchard fell into such a violent rage that it nearly killed him. He
broke the wheel into a thousand pieces, and then fell fainting on the
ground. He was carried back to the castle, unconscious.

The next day the wheel was mended, and the spinner sat down to spin.
Feeling that while she was spinning he was dying, the Count ordered that
her hands should be tied, and that they should not lose sight of her for
one instant.

But the guards fell asleep, the bonds loosed themselves, and the spinner
spun on.

Burchard had every nettle rooted up for three leagues round. Scarcely
had they been torn from the soil when they sowed themselves afresh, and
grew as you were looking at them.

They sprung up even in the well-trodden floor of the cottage, and as
fast as they were uprooted the distaff gathered to itself a supply of
nettles, crushed, prepared, and ready for spinning.

And every day Burchard grew worse, and watched his end approaching.