And when the King's daughter, with her female slaves and the old woman,
entered the garden, the old woman said within herself, If the eunuchs be
with us, we shall not attain our wish. So she said to the King's
daughter, O my mistress, I would propose to thee a thing productive of
ease to thy heart. And the lady Dunya replied, Propose what thou wilt.
The old woman therefore said, O my mistress, thou hast no need of these
eunuchs at the present time; nor will thy heart be dilated as long as
they are with us: so dismiss them from us.--Thou hast spoken truly,
replied the lady Dunya:--and she dismissed them; and a little while
after, as she was walking, Taj-el-Mulook beheld her, and gazed at her
beauty and loveliness, while she knew it not; and every time that he
looked at her he fainted, by reason of her surpassing beauty. The old
woman in the meantime led her on by conversation to the pavilion which
the Wezeer had ordered to be painted; and, entering this pavilion, the
lady Dunya took a view of its paintings, and saw the birds and the
fowler and the pigeons; whereupon she exclaimed, Extolled be the
perfection of God! Verily this is the representation of what I beheld in
my dream!--And she continued gazing at the figures of the birds and the
fowler and the snare, full of wonder; and said, O my nurse, I used to
censure men, and hate them; but see the fowler, how he hath killed the
female bird, and the male hath escaped, and desired to return to the
female to liberate her, but the bird of prey hath met him and captured
him. The old woman, however, affected ignorance to her, and proceeded to
divert her with talk until they both approached the place where
Taj-el-Mulook was concealed; upon which she made a sign to him that he
should walk beneath the windows of the pavilion; and while the lady
Dunya stood there, she looked aside, and saw him, and, observing the
beauty of his face, and his elegant form, she said, O my nurse, whence
is this handsome youth? The old woman answered, I know him not; but I
imagine that he is the son of a great King; for he is of the utmost
beauty and loveliness. And the lady Dunya was enraptured with him. The
spells that bound her were dissolved, her reason was overcome by his
beauty and loveliness and his elegant person, and she was affected by
violent love: so she said to the old woman, O my nurse, verily this
young man is handsome. The old woman replied, Thou hast spoken truth, O
my mistress. And she made a sign to the King's son to return to his
house. The fire of desire flamed within him, and his rapture and
distraction became excessive; but he went, and bade farewell to the
superintendent, and departed to his abode, that he might not disobey the
old woman, and acquainted the Wezeer and 'Azeez that she had made a sign
to him to depart. And they both exhorted him to be patient, saying to
him, If the old woman did not know that there was an object to be
attained by thy return, she had not made a sign to thee to do so.

Now to return to the lady Dunya.--Desire overcame her, and her rapture
and distraction increased; so she said to the old woman, I know not how
to obtain an interview with this young man but through thy means. The
old woman exclaimed, I seek refuge with Allah from Satan the accursed!
Thou hast no desire for men; and how, then, have fears affected thee in
consequence of the love of him? But, by Allah, none other than he is
suited to thy youth.--O my nurse, rejoined the lady Dunya, assist me to
obtain an interview with him, and thou shalt receive from me a thousand
pieces of gold, and a dress of the same value: if thou assist me not to
gain him, I shall die inevitably. So the old woman replied, Go thou to
thy palace, and I will devise means to bring you together, and give my
life to satisfy you both. The lady Dunya then returned to her palace,
while the old woman repaired to Taj-el-Mulook; and when he saw her, he
rose to her, and stood, and received her with respect and honour,
seating her by his side; and she said to him, The stratagem hath
succeeded. She then related to him what had occurred between her and
the lady Dunya; and he said to her, When shall be the interview? She
answered, To-morrow. And he gave her a thousand pieces of gold, and a
garment of the same value: and she took them, and departed, and stopped
not until she went in to the lady Dunya, who said to her, O my nurse,
what news hast thou brought from the beloved?--I have discovered his
abode, she answered; and to-morrow I will bring him to thee. And at this
the lady Dunya rejoiced, and gave her a thousand pieces of gold, and a
garment of the same value; and she took them, and returned to her house.

She passed the next night, and in the morning she went forth and
repaired to Taj-el-Mulook, and, having clad him in women's apparel, said
to him, Walk behind me, and incline thy body from side to side as thou
steppest, and proceed not with a hasty pace, nor take
notice of any one who may speak to thee. And after she had thus charged
him, she went forth, and he behind her in his female attire; and she
proceeded to instruct him, on the way, how to act, that he might not
fear. She continued on her way, he following her, until they arrived at
the entrance of the palace, when she entered, and he also after her, and
she passed through successive doors and antechambers until she had
conducted him through seven doors. And when she arrived at the seventh
door, she said to Taj-el-Mulook, Fortify thy heart, and if I call out to
thee, and say to thee, O slave-girl, advance!--be not tardy in thy pace,
but hasten on, and when thou hast entered the antechamber beyond, look
to thy left: thou wilt see a saloon with seven doors; and do thou count
five doors, and enter the sixth; for within it is the object of thy
desire.--And whither goest _thou_? said Taj-el-Mulook. She answered, I
have no place to go to; but perhaps I may wait after thee and speak with
the chief eunuch. She then proceeded, and he followed her, until they
arrived at the door where was the chief eunuch; and he saw with her
Taj-el-Mulook in the attire of a female slave, and said to her, What is
the business of this slave-girl who is with thee? She answered him, The
lady Dunya hath heard that this girl is skilled in different kinds of
work, and she desireth to purchase her. But the eunuch replied, I know
neither slave-girl nor any other person; and no one shall enter without
being searched by me, as the King hath commanded me. Upon this, the old
woman, manifesting anger, said to him, I knew that thou wast a man of
sense and of good manners; and if thou art changed I will acquaint her
with this, and inform her that thou hast offered opposition to her
female slave. She then called out to Taj-el-Mulook, and said to him,
Advance, O slave-girl! And immediately he entered the antechamber, as
she had commanded him, and the eunuch was silent, and said no more. So
Taj-el-Mulook counted five doors, and entered the sixth, and found the
lady Dunya standing expecting him.



As soon as she beheld him, she knew him, and pressed him to her bosom,
and he embraced her in like manner; and the old woman, coming in to
them, contrived a pretext to dismiss the female slaves; after which the
lady Dunya said to her, Be thou keeper of the door. She then remained
alone with Taj-el-Mulook, and they passed the whole night in innocent
dalliance. And on the following morning she closed the
door upon him and the old woman, and entering another apartment, sat
there according to her custom; and her female slaves came to her, and
she transacted their affairs and conversed with them, and then said to
them, Go forth from me now; for I desire to amuse myself in solitude. So
they left her, and she returned to Taj-el-Mulook and the old woman,
taking with her some food for them; and thus they ceased not to do for a
whole month.

As to the Wezeer, however, and 'Azeez, when Taj-el-Mulook had gone to
the palace of the King's daughter and remained all this time, they
concluded that he would never return from it, and that he was inevitably
lost; and 'Azeez said to the Wezeer, O my father, what wilt thou do? The
Wezeer answered, O my son, this affair is one of difficulty, and if we
return not to his father to acquaint him, he will blame us for our
negligence. So they prepared themselves immediately, and journeyed
towards El-Ar el-Khara and El-'Amoodeyn and the royal
residence of the King Suleyman Shah, and traversed the valleys night and
day until they went in and presented themselves before the King Suleyman
Shah; and they informed him of that which had happened to his son, and
that they had learnt no news of him since he had entered the palace of
the King's daughter. On hearing this, he was as though the day of
resurrection had surprised him: his sorrow was intense, and he gave
orders to make a proclamation of war throughout his dominions. He then
sent forth his troops outside the city, and caused the tents to be
pitched for them, and remained in his pavilion until the forces had
assembled from all the quarters of his kingdom. His subjects loved him
for his great justice and beneficence, and he departed with an army that
covered the earth as far as the eye could reach, for the purpose of
demanding his son Taj-el-Mulook.

In the meantime, Taj-el-Mulook and the lady Dunya continued together for
half a year, every day increasing in mutual love; and the love and
distraction and rapture of Taj-el-Mulook so augmented that he opened to
her his mind, and said to her, Know, O beloved of my heart, that the
longer I remain with thee, the more do my distraction and ecstasy and
desire increase; for I have not altogether attained my wish. So she
said, What dost thou wish, O light of my eye, and delight of my heart?
He answered, I desire to acquaint thee with my true history: know, then,
that I am not a merchant, but a King, son of a King, and the name of my
father is the Supreme King Suleyman Shah, who sent the Wezeer as
ambassador to thy father to demand thee for me in marriage; and when the
news came to thee thou refusedst to consent.--He then related to her his
story from first to last; and added, I desire now to repair to my
father, that he may send an ambassador again to thy father, to demand
thee in marriage from him, and so we shall remain at ease.--And when she
heard this, she rejoiced exceedingly: for it coincided with her wish;
and they passed the next night determined upon this proceeding.

But it happened, in accordance with destiny, that sleep overcame them
unusually that night, and they remained until the sun had risen. The
King Shah-Zeman was then upon his royal seat, with the emeers of his
empire before him, and the chief of the goldsmiths presented himself,
having in his hand a large round casket: and he advanced, and, opening
it before the King, took forth from it an elegant box worth a hundred
thousand pieces of gold for the jewels it contained, and rubies and
emeralds, such as no King of the earth could procure. And when the King
saw it, he wondered at its beauty; and he looked towards the chief
eunuch, to whom the affair with the old woman had happened (as above
described), and said to him, O Kafoor, take this box, and
go with it to the lady Dunya. So the eunuch took it, and proceeded until
he arrived at the chamber of the King's daughter, when he found its door
closed, and the old woman sleeping at its threshold, and he exclaimed,
Until this hour are ye sleeping? And when the old woman heard what he
said, she awoke from her sleep, and, in her fear of him, said, Wait
until I bring the key. She then went forth and fled. The eunuch,
therefore, knew that she was alarmed, and he displaced the
door, and, entering the chamber, found the lady Dunya
asleep with Taj-el-Mulook. At the sight of this, he was perplexed at his
case, and was meditating to return to the King, when the lady Dunya
awoke, and found him by her; and she was troubled, and her countenance
became pale, and she said, O Kafoor, veil what God hath veiled. But he
replied, I cannot conceal anything from the King. And he closed the door
upon them, and returned to the King. So the King said to him, Hast thou
given the box to thy mistress? The eunuch answered, Take the box: here
it is. I cannot conceal from thee anything. Know that I beheld, with the
lady Dunya, a handsome young man, sleeping in the same chamber. The King
therefore ordered that they should be both brought before him; and when
they had come into his presence, he said to them, What are these deeds?
And he was violently enraged, and, seizing a dagger, was
about to strike with it Taj-el-Mulook; but the lady Dunya threw her head
upon him, and said to her father, Slay me before him. The King, however,
chid her, and ordered them to convey her back to her chamber. Then
looking towards Taj-el-Mulook, he said to him, Wo to thee! Whence art
thou, and who is thy father, and what hath emboldened thee to act thus
towards my daughter?--Know, O King, answered Taj-el-Mulook, that, if
thou put me to death, thou wilt perish, and thou and all in thy
dominions will repent.--And why so? said the King. He answered, Know
that I am the son of the King Suleyman Shah, and thou wilt not be aware
of the consequence when he will approach thee with his horsemen and his
infantry. And when King Shah-Zeman heard this, he desired to defer
putting him to death; and to imprison him until he should see whether
his assertion were true; but his Wezeer said to him, O King of the age,
it is my advice that thou hasten the execution of this young wretch,
since he hath been guilty of presumption towards the daughters of Kings.
So he said to the executioner, Strike off his head; for he is a traitor.
And the executioner took him, and, having bound him firmly, raised his
hand, and made a sign of consultation to the emeers a first and a second
time, desiring by this that some delay might take place; but the King
called out to him, How long wilt thou consult? If thou do so again I
will strike off thy head.



The executioner, therefore, raised his hand until his arm-pit appeared,
and was about to strike off his head, when loud cries were heard, and,
the people closed their shops. So the King said to the executioner,
Hasten not. And he sent a person to learn the news for him; and the
messenger went, and, soon returning, said to the King, I beheld an army
like the roaring sea agitated with waves; their horses are prancing, and
the earth trembleth beneath them, and I know not wherefore they are
come. And the King was amazed, and feared lest he should be deposed from
his throne. He then said to his Wezeer, Have none of our troops gone
forth to meet this army? But his words were not finished when his
chamberlains came in to him accompanied by the messengers of the
approaching King, and among them was the Wezeer who had been with
Taj-el-Mulook. He commenced by salutation; and the King rose to him,
and, calling them near to him, asked them respecting the cause of their
coming: whereupon the Wezeer advanced from among them, and approached
the King, and said to him, Know that he who hath alighted in thy
territories is a King not like the Kings who have preceded him, nor like
the Sulans of former times.--And who is he? said the King. The Wezeer
answered, He is the lord of justice and security, the fame of whose
magnanimity the caravans have spread abroad, the Sulan Suleyman Shah,
the lord of El-Ar el-Khara and El-'Amoodeyn and the mountains of
Ipahan, who loveth justice and equity, and hateth tyranny and
oppression; and he saith to thee, that his son is in thy dominions and
in thy city, and he is the vital spirit of his heart, and its delight;
and if he find him in safety, it is what he desireth, and thou wilt be
thanked and praised; but if he be not found in thy country, or if any
evil hath befallen him, receive tidings of destruction and of the ruin
of thy territories; for thy country shall become a desert in which the
raven shall croak. Thus I have delivered to thee the message; and peace
be on thee.--When the King Shah-Zeman heard these words of the envoy,
his heart was troubled, and he feared for his kingdom, and called out to
the lords of his empire, and his wezeers and chamberlains and
lieutenants; and when they had come before him he said to them, Wo unto
you! Go down and search for this young man.--But he was under the hand
of the executioner, and his appearance was changed through the fear that
he suffered. The Wezeer then, looking aside, found the King's son upon
the skin of blood, and he recognised him, and arose, and
threw himself upon him. So also did the other messengers: they then
unbound him, and kissed his hands and his feet; whereupon Taj-el-Mulook
opened his eyes, and, recognising the Wezeer and his companion 'Azeez,
fell down in a swoon through the excess of his joy at their presence.

The King Shah-Zeman was perplexed at his situation, and in great fear,
on discovering that the coming of the army was on account of this young
man; and he arose and walked forward to Taj-el-Mulook, and kissed his
head, and, with weeping eyes, said to him, O my son, be not angry with
me: be not angry with the evil-doer for his deed; but have compassion on
my gray hairs, and lay not waste my dominions. And Taj-el-Mulook
approached him, and kissed his hand, saying to him, No harm shall befall
thee; for thou art in my estimation as my father; but beware that no
evil befall my beloved, the lady Dunya.--O my lord, rejoined the King,
fear not for her; for nought but happiness awaiteth her. And he
proceeded to excuse himself to him, and to soothe the mind of the Wezeer
of the King Suleyman Shah, promising him a large sum of money that he
might conceal from the King what he had seen; after which he ordered the
grandees of his empire to take Taj-el-Mulook and to conduct him to the
bath, to clothe him in a suit of the best of royal apparel, and bring
him back quickly. So they did this: they conducted him into the bath,
and, having clad him in the suit which the King Shah-Zeman had allotted
him, brought him back to the hall of audience; and when he came in, the
King rose to him, he and all the lords of his empire, and they all stood
to wait upon him. Then Taj-el-Mulook sat and conversed with his father's
Wezeer and with 'Azeez respecting the events which had happened to him;
and they replied, During that period we went to thy father, and informed
him that thou hadst entered the palace of the King's daughter, and not
come forth from it, and that thy case appeared doubtful to us; and when
he heard this, he made ready the troops, and we came to this country,
and on our arrival have experienced joy and happiness. So he said to
them, Good fortune hath attended your actions, first and last.

The King, in the meantime, had gone into his daughter, the lady Dunya,
and found her weeping for Taj-el-Mulook. She had taken a sword, and put
its hilt to the floor, and its point to the middle of her bosom, and was
leaning over it, saying, I must kill myself, and not live after my
beloved. When her father, therefore, went in to her, and beheld her in
this state, he called out to her, and said, O mistress of the daughters
of Kings, do it not; but have mercy upon thy father and the people of
thy country! Then advancing to her, he said to her, I conjure thee to
abstain, lest evil befall thy father on thy account. And he acquainted
her with the case, telling her that her beloved, the son of the King
Suleyman Shah, desired to celebrate his marriage with her, and adding,
The affair of the betrothal and marriage is committed to thy judgment.
And she smiled, and said to him, Did I not tell thee that he was the son
of a Sulan? I will make him crucify thee upon a piece of wood worth a
couple of pieces of silver. I conjure thee by Allah, he exclaimed, that
thou have mercy upon thy father!--Go to him, she rejoined, and bring him
to me. He replied, On the head and the eye. And he returned from her
quickly, and, going in to Taj-el-Mulook, rejoiced him by what he said.
He then arose with him, and went to her again; and when she beheld
Taj-el-Mulook, she embraced him in the presence of her father, and clung
to him, and said to him, Thou hast made me desolate by thine absence.
Then looking at her father, she said, Can any one act injuriously
towards such a person as this handsome youth, and he a King, a son of a
King? And upon this the King Shah-Zeman went forth, and closed the door
upon them, and, repairing to the Wezeer and the other messengers of the
father of Taj-el-Mulook, ordered them to inform the Sulan Suleyman Shah
that his son was in prosperity and health, and enjoying a life of the
utmost delight. He gave orders also to carry forth provisions and pay to
the troops of the Sulan Suleyman Shah; and after they had conveyed all
that he commanded them to take forth, he brought out a hundred coursers,
and a hundred dromedaries, and a hundred memlooks, and a hundred
concubine slaves, and a hundred male black slaves, and a hundred female
slaves, and sent them all to him as a present.



He then repaired to him, with the lords of his empire, and his chief
attendants, and they proceeded until they arrived outside the city; and
when the Sulan Suleyman Shah became acquainted with this he advanced
some paces to meet him. The Wezeer and 'Azeez had informed him of the
news, and he rejoiced, and exclaimed, Praise be to God who hath granted
my son the accomplishment of his wish! And he embraced the King
Shah-Zeman, and seated him by his side upon the couch, and they
conversed together; after which the attendants placed before; them the
food, and when they had eaten to satisfaction they brought them the
sweetmeats. Soon after, Taj-el-Mulook came, approaching in his rich and
ornamented dress; and when his father beheld him, he rose to him and
kissed him, and all who were present rose to him; and after he had sat
with them a while conversing, the King Suleyman Shah said, I desire to
perform my son's contract of marriage to thy daughter in the presence of
witnesses. And King Shah-Zeman replied, I hear and obey. So he summoned
the aee and witnesses, and they came, and wrote the marriage-contract;
and the troops rejoiced at this. And King Shah-Zeman began to fit out
his daughter.

Then Taj-el-Mulook said to his father, Verily, 'Azeez is a generous
person; he hath performed for me a great service, and wearied himself,
and journeyed with me, and enabled me to attain the object of my search,
ceasing not to exhort me to patience until I accomplished my wish, and
he hath been with us two years separated from his country: it is my
desire, therefore, that we should prepare for him merchandise; for his
country is near. His father replied, Thy opinion is excellent. So they
prepared for him a hundred loads of the most costly stuffs; and
Taj-el-Mulook bade him farewell, saying to him, O my brother, accept
this as a present. And he accepted it, and kissed the ground before him
and before his father. Taj-el-Mulook then mounted his horse, and
proceeded with 'Azeez for the space of three miles; after which, 'Azeez
conjured him to return, and said, Were it not for my mother, I could not
endure thy separation; and by Allah, I entreat thee not to cease
acquainting me with thy state. Having thus said, he bade him farewell,
and repaired to his city. He found that his mother had built for him a
tomb in the midst of the house, and she frequently visited it; and when
he entered the house, he found that she had dishevelled her hair and
spread it upon the tomb, and, with streaming eyes, was reciting these
verses:--

  By Allah, O tomb, have his charms perished; and hath that brilliant
    countenance changed?
  O tomb, thou art neither a garden nor a firmament: how then can
    the full moon and flowers be united in thee?

She then groaned, and recited some other verses; but before she had
finished, 'Azeez went in to her: and when she beheld him, she rose to
him and embraced him, and asked him respecting his long absence: so he
acquainted her with all the events that had happened to him from first
to last, and told her that Taj-el-Mulook had given him, of wealth and
stuffs, a hundred loads; and she rejoiced at this.--Such was the history
of 'Azeez.

Now as to Taj-el-Mulook, he returned to his beloved, the lady Dunya, and
King Shah-Zeman fitted her out for the journey with her husband and her
father-in-law: he sent to them provisions and presents and rarities, and
they loaded their beasts and departed; and King Shah-Zeman accompanied
them three days' journey to bid them farewell. The King Suleyman Shah
then conjured him to return: so he returned; and Taj-el-Mulook and his
father and his wife continued their journey night and day until they
came in sight of their country. The city was decorated for them, and
they entered it; and the King Suleyman Shah sat upon his throne with his
son Taj-el-Mulook by his side; and he gave presents, and liberated the
persons confined in the prisons; after which he celebrated for his son a
second wedding-festivity: the songs and instrumental music were
continued for a whole month, and the tire-women crowded around the lady
Dunya, and she was not tired with the display, nor were they with gazing
at her. Taj-el-Mulook then took up his abode with her, after an
interview with his father and mother together; and they passed a life of
the utmost delight and enjoyment.