NOTES TO CHAPTER SIXTH.

NOTE 1. In the old version, the person here named Enees-el-Jelees is
called "The Fair Persian;" but I do not find her so described in any
copy of the original. The name here given to her may be rendered "the
Companion's Cheerer;" "Enees" being a term applied to any person or
thing serving as an agreeable, cheering companion; and "Jelees"
signifying "a companion," or "one in the habit of sitting with another."

NOTE 2. "Khaeeyeh" is derived from "kha," which signifies "writing,"
but which is also the name of a place (Kha Hejer) in the province of
El-Bareyn, a famous mart for spears. Of the figure of speech employed
in the couplet in which this word occurs (considered by the Arabs an
elegant mode of etiology, and called by them "osn et-taaleel") my
sheykh gives the following example in a marginal note:--

  "And the rain fell not but for the purpose of kissing the ground
     before thee."

NOTE 3. "El-Mo'een" signifies "the Aider," or "the Assistant."

NOTE 4. "El-Fal," signifying "the Excellence," is here, as a proper
name, an abbreviation of "Fal-ed-Deen," "the Excellence of the
Religion."

NOTE 5. This phrase (a person of auspicious aspect) is often used
by the modern Arabs and the Turks, and signifies "a virtuous or
beneficent man."

NOTE 6. This answer is not to be understood in its literal sense; it has
become a common form of speech which an Arab often uses for the purpose
of obtaining something more than he would venture to demand.

NOTE 7. "May it be favourable," or "----beneficial," is a compliment
usually addressed to a person who has just been to the bath, and to a
man who has just had his head shaved. The reply is, "May God bestow
favours upon thee."

NOTE 8.--_On the Law respecting Murder and unintentional Homicide._ The
ur-an ordains that murder shall be punished with death; or, rather,
that the free shall die for the free, the slave for the slave, and a
woman for a woman; or that the perpetrator of the crime shall pay, to
the heirs of the person whom he has killed, if they will allow it, a
fine, which is to be divided according to the laws of inheritance.
It also ordains, that unintentional homicide shall be expiated by
freeing a believer from slavery, and paying, to the family of the person
killed, a fine, unless they remit it. But these laws are amplified
and explained by the same book and by the Imams.--A fine is not to be
accepted for murder unless the crime has been attended by some
palliating circumstance. This fine, the price of blood, is a hundred
camels; or a thousand deenars (about 500_l._) from him who possesses
gold; or, from him who possesses silver, twelve thousand dirhems
(about 300_l._). This is for killing a free man; for a woman, half that
sum; for a slave, his or her value, but that must fall short of the
price of blood for the free. A person unable to free a believer must
fast two months as in Ramaan. The accomplices of a murderer are liable
to the punishment of death. By the Sunneh also, a man is obnoxious to
capital punishment for the murder of a woman; and by the anafee law,
for the murder of another man's slave. But he is exempted from this
punishment who kills his own child or other descendant, or his own
slave, or his son's slave, or a slave of whom he is part-owner: so also
are his accomplices: and according to Esh-Shafe'ee, a Muslim, though a
slave, is not to be put to death for killing an infidel, though the
latter be free. A man who kills another in self-defence, or to defend
his property from a robber, is exempt from all punishment. The price of
blood is a debt incumbent on the family, tribe, or association, of which
the homicide is a member. It is also incumbent on the inhabitants of an
enclosed quarter, or the proprietor or proprietors of a field, in which
the body of a person killed by an unknown hand is found; unless the
person has been found killed in his own house.

Hence it appears, that the punishment with which the Wezeer El-Fal
threatened his son is not to be regarded as a grave criminal act;
especially when we consider the nature of the son's offence: for the
slave was the property of the king, and it was not allowable to any
other man even to see her without his permission. Many of the characters
depicted in the present work would seem incongruous in the extreme, if
judged according to European notions of justice and other moral
qualities.

NOTE 9. "The two professions of the faith," "There is no deity but God,"
and "Moammad is God's Apostle," are generally repeated by a dying
Muslim.

NOTE 10. This is said to imply (as my sheykh has remarked in a marginal
note) that El-Fal was a charitable person who bestowed pensions upon
the professors of the ur-an and of science. There are many among the
modern Muslims who do so, and numbers also who found and endow public
schools.

NOTE 11.--_On the Washing, Shrouding, and Burial of the Dead._ The
ceremonies attendant upon death and burial are nearly the same in the
cases of men and women. The face or the head of the dying person is
turned towards the direction of Mekkeh. When the spirit is departing,
the eyes are closed; and then, or immediately after, the women of the
house commence a loud lamentation, in which many of the females of the
neighbourhood generally come to join. Hired female mourners are also
usually employed; each of whom accompanies her exclamations of "Alas for
him!" &c., by beating a tambourine. If possible, the corpse is buried on
the day of the death; but when this cannot be done, the lamentation of
the women is continued during the ensuing night; and a recitation of
several chapters, or of the whole, of the ur-an is performed by one or
more men hired for the purpose.

The washing consists, first, in the performance of the ordinary ablution
which is preparatory to prayer, with the exception of the cleansing of
the mouth and nose; and secondly, in an ablution of the whole body with
warm water and soap, or with water in which some leaves of the lote-tree
have been boiled. The jaw is bound up, the eyes are closed, and the
nostrils &c., are stuffed with cotton; and the corpse is sprinkled with
a mixture of water, pounded camphor, dried and pounded leaves of the
lote-tree, and sometimes other dried and pulverized leaves, &c., and
with rose-water. The ankles are bound together; and the hands placed
upon the breast.

The grave-clothing of a poor man consists of a piece or two of cotton,
or a kind of bag: but the corpse of a man of wealth is generally wrapped
first in muslin; then, in cotton cloth of a thicker texture; next, in a
piece of striped stuff of silk and cotton intermixed, or in a afan (a
long vest) of similar stuff, merely stitched together; and over these is
wrapped a Kashmeer shawl. The colours most approved for the
grave-clothes are white and green. The body thus shrouded is placed in a
bier, which is usually covered with a Kashmeer shawl, and borne on the
shoulders of three or four men, generally friends of the deceased.

There are some slight differences in the funeral-ceremonies observed in
different Arab countries; but a sufficient notion of them will be
conveyed by briefly describing those which prevail in Cairo. The
procession to the tomb is generally headed by a number of poor men,
mostly blind, who, walking two and two, or three and three, together,
chant, in a melancholy tone, the profession (or two professions) of the
faith, mentioned above (in Note 9), or sometimes other words. They are
usually followed by some male relations and friends of the deceased; and
these, by a group of schoolboys, chanting in a higher tone, and one of
them bearing a copy of the ur-an, or of one of its thirty sections,
placed upon a kind of desk formed of palm-sticks, and covered with an
embroidered kerchief. Then follows the bier, borne head-foremost.
Friends of the deceased relieve one another in the office of carrying
it; and casual passengers often take part in this service, which is
esteemed highly meritorious. Behind the bier walk the female mourners,
composing a numerous group, often more than a dozen; or, if of a wealthy
family, they ride. Each of those who belong to the family of the
deceased has a strip of cotton stuff or muslin, generally blue, bound
round her head, over the head-veil, and carries a handkerchief, usually
dyed blue (the colour of mourning), which she sometimes holds over her
shoulders, and at other times twirls with both hands over her head or
before her face, while she cries and shrieks almost incessantly; and the
hired female mourners, accompanying the group, often celebrate the
praises of the deceased in the manner described in the preceding tale,
though this was forbidden by the Prophet.--The funeral-procession of a
man of wealth is sometimes preceded by several camels, bearing bread and
water to give to the poor at the tomb; and closed by the led horses of
some of the attendants, and by a buffalo or other animal to be
sacrificed at the tomb, where its flesh is distributed to the poor, to
atone for some of the minor sins of the deceased.

The bier used for conveying the corpse of a boy or a female has a cover
of wood, over which a shawl is spread; and at the head is an upright
piece of wood: upon the upper part of this, in the case of a boy, is
fixed a turban, with several ornaments of female head-dress; and in the
case of a female, it is similarly decked, but without the turban.

A short prayer is recited over the dead, either in a mosque or in a
place particularly dedicated to this service in, or adjacent to, the
burial-ground. The body is then conveyed, in the same manner as before,
to the tomb. This is a hollow, oblong vault, one side of which faces the
direction of Mekkeh, generally large enough to contain four or more
bodies, and having an oblong monument of stone or brick constructed over
it, with a stela at the head and foot. Upon the former of these two
stele (which is often inscribed with a text from the ur-an, and the
name of the deceased, with the date of his death), a turban, cap, or
other head-dress, is sometimes carved, shewing the rank or class of the
person or persons buried beneath; and in many cases, a cupola supported
by four walls, or by columns, &c., is constructed over the smaller
monument. The body is laid on its right side, or inclined by means of a
few crude bricks, so that the face is turned towards Mekkeh; and a
person is generally employed to dictate to the deceased the answers
which he should give when he is examined by the two angels Munkar and
Nekeer, whom I have mentioned in No. 21 of the Notes to the
Introduction. If the funeral be that of a person of rank or wealth, the
bread and water &c. before mentioned are then distributed to the
poor.

The principal ceremonies observed _after_ the funeral have been
described in Note 15 to Chapter iv.

NOTE 12. "The lord (or chief) of the first and the last among mankind"
is one of the many appellations of honour given by the Muslims to their
Prophet.

NOTE 13. My sheykh remarks, that this is said merely to excite men to
generosity; for literally it is not true, as is shown by the memorable
example of Kaab the son of Mameh, who preferred giving the water with
which he was provided to another, and in consequence himself died of
thirst.

NOTE 14. We are not to understand that such a slave as Enees-el-Jelees
was exposed to the public gaze in a market to which all persons
indiscriminately were admitted (for this would be at variance with
Eastern usages); but in a special mart to which none were allowed access
but persons of wealth who expressed a desire to purchase.

NOTE 15.--_On Kissing the Ground, as a Mode of Obeisance._ This and
several other passages in the present work shew that we are often to
understand the expression "kissing the ground before a person" as
signifying "touching the ground, and then the lips and forehead, or
turban, with the right hand;" and I believe this expression should
_generally_ be so understood. When I wrote the fourteenth note to the
Introduction, I inclined to a contrary opinion, chiefly from
recollecting to have read the following translation of a passage of
El-Mareezee, by the learned De Sacy:--"Ce khalife  ordonna
qu'a l'avenir on ne baiseroit plus la terre devant lui; que personne, en
le saluant dans les marches publiques, ne baiseroit sa main ou son
etrier, parce que cette coutume de se _prosterner_ devant une creature
etoit une invention des Grecs." But on referring to the original, I
find that the words which he renders "cette coutume de se prosterner"
signify literally "the bending towards the ground." I suppose,
therefore, that his deviating from the literal sense in one case was
owing to his adhering to it in another; and not meeting with the proof
which I had fancied to exist of his being right, I venture to differ
from him in this instance, without fear of being suspected of arrogance,
as the kind of obeisance above described is _often_ called "kissing the
ground" both by the Arabs and the Persians. I should add that, except in
the house, I do not remember to have ever seen the ground actually
touched, but nearly so, in making this obeisance, which is still called
"kissing the ground" when thus imperfectly performed.

NOTE 16. By this is meant, a place where mud was kneaded to be employed
in building. The mortar generally used in the construction of Arab
houses is composed of mud in the proportion of one-half, with a fourth
part of lime, and the remaining part of the ashes of straw and rubbish.

NOTE 17. See the note immediately preceding.

NOTE 18. In Arabic, "bursh." This kind of mat, composed of palm-leaves
(and sometimes, I believe, of the coarse grass mentioned in the next
note), is used by the poor to sit upon.

NOTE 19. This kind of grass, called in Arabic "alfeh," and more
properly "alfa" (by botanists, poa multiflora, and poa cynosyroides),
and the "'aool" (or hedysarum alhagi), overspread spontaneously most of
the alluvial tracts in Egypt which are above the reach of the
inundation, and in consequence left uncultivated. The former is used in
the manufacture of coarse mats, and the latter serves as pasture for
camels. The Wezeer, by taking the round mat and the two bundles of
alfa, seems to indicate that he is degraded to a condition as low as
that of a maker of coarse mats. [The practice mentioned in the passage
to which this note refers is aptly illustrated in El-Mareezee's Khia.
In his description of the palaces of the Faimee Khaleefehs, he says,
"There was in the Great Palace a place known by the name of the
Saeefeh, where complainants of injustice used to station themselves;
and it was a custom of the Khaleefeh to sit there every night, for those
of the complainants of injustice who might come to him. When any one,
therefore, was wronged, he would stand under the Saeefeh, and say, in
a loud voice, 'There is no deity but God, Moammad is the Apostle of
God, 'Alee is the Friend (Welee) of God;' and the Khaleefeh would hear
him, and command him to be brought to him, or he would intrust his case
to the Wezeer," &c.--ED.]

NOTE 20. The boats used by the Arabs in the navigation of rivers are
generally moored by means of a rope attached to a stake which is driven
into the bank.

NOTE 21. By "children of the road" are meant "travellers."

NOTE 22. See Note 55 to Chapter iii.

NOTE 23. The word which I render elevated (mo'allaah) is applied to a
structure raised upon columns or pillars, &c.

NOTE 24. The "ghaa" is a tree of a very inflammable nature, which, in
burning, gives out a fierce heat. It grows chiefly in sandy tracts, and
is described as resembling the "athl" (or tamarisk), but as being
smaller than this tree.

NOTE 25.--_On Shaving the Head._ I do not know when the custom of
shaving the head became general among the Arabs of the towns; but from a
remark of Es-Suyooee, I think it was not so common about the
commencement of the tenth century of the Flight (that is, about the
period which this work best illustrates) as it is at present, when it is
almost universal among all classes; for in his time, its legality was
doubted. He writes thus:--"The Iman El-Ghazalee hath said, 'There is no
harm in it in the case of him whose object is cleanliness:' and the
apparent sense of his words is, that it is improper in him who desireth
to beautify himself for any worldly purpose, as is done by people of bad
disposition." It is added in a marginal note in the copy from which
I translate this, "Persons differ respecting the shaving of the head.
The opinion generally prevailing is, that it is improper to him who
wears not a turban, and allowable to him who does wear one, since he has
a substitute:"--"that it is also lawful, unquestionably, in the case of
any disease of the head:"--and "that the hanging of the rosary to the
neck, and the shaving of the head without a legal necessity, are
innovations,"--Haroon Er-Rasheed generally wore the hair of his head
sufficiently long to reach below his ears; but shaved it when he
performed the pilgrimage; and many other Muslims in early times did
the same. Those who shave the head generally leave a small tuft upon the
crown; but most persons of the literary and religious professions, and
many others, disapprove of this tuft.

NOTE 26. By the term "sheykhs" we are here to understand "persons of
sanctity and of learning." See Note 9 to Chapter i.

NOTE 27. By "the shining moon" is meant "the beautiful cup-bearer, whose
face is like the shining moon."

NOTE 28. The Muslims believe that a blessing is derived from witnessing
and hearing the devout exercises, recitations, &c., of holy men.

NOTE 29. The "jubbeh" worn in Eastern countries, is a long outer vest,
with sleeves which reach nearly to the wrist. It is now generally made
of cloth, and is worn by most tradesmen and other persons of the middle
and higher classes. It differs somewhat in form in different countries.

NOTE 30. The "melwaah" is a garment of which I was unable to obtain a
description until I inquired of my friend Mr. Salame, who informed me
that it was the name of a large outer garment which used to be worn over
the farajeeyeh. But I afterwards found it stated in one of the marginal
notes to a later tale, that the term above mentioned is now pronounced
"mellooah," and is applied in the present day to an article of dress of
cloth or other costly material; particularly to a jubbeh; but that it
is also employed, in allusion to a jubbeh, &c., in a contemptuous sense,
or, as I infer, ironically.

NOTE 31. See Note 41 to Chapter iv.

NOTE 32. The "litham" is a piece of drapery with which a Bedawee often
covers the lower part of his face. It frequently prevents his being
recognised by another Arab who might make him a victim of blood-revenge;
and is a means of disguise seldom employed but by Arabs of the desert.

NOTE 33. The meaning is, that the act would speak for itself, and be
long remembered; that the grave of the fisherman would be pointed out as
that of one to whom the Khaleefeh had shewn signal favours.

NOTE 34. It is a common custom of Arabs of the lower orders to put the
money which they receive, especially when it is the first of the day's
gains, to the lips and forehead before depositing it in the pocket; and
the same is sometimes done by persons of the middle class.

NOTE 35. Literally, "twenty nufs." See Note 17 to Chapter iii.

NOTE 36. These are the aees of the four great sects, or persuasions,
of the Sunnee Muslims. See Note 1 to the Introduction.

NOTE 37. The words "and the Wezeer took him away" are omitted in the
Cairo edition.

NOTE 38. "uey" is the diminutive of "i," _vulgo_ "u," a "cat,"
and properly a "he-cat."

NOTE 39. The words which I translate "the place of blood" literally
signify "the place of the stagnation of blood;" and are applied to the
usual place of decapitation, because the blood is left there to soak
into the ground.

NOTE 40. The recompense here alluded to is one to be received at the
final retribution; not in the present life.

NOTE 41. This kind of "ulleh" is a small, porous, earthen bottle, with
a wide mouth. Some specimens of it are figured beneath.