CONTINUATION OF THE STORY OF THE FISHERMAN.

Now, O 'Efreet, continued the fisherman, know that if King Yoonan had
spared the sage Dooban, God had spared him; but he refused, and desired
his destruction; therefore God destroyed him: and thou, O 'Efreet, if
thou hadst spared me, God had spared thee, and I had spared thee; but
thou desiredst my death; therefore will I put thee to death imprisoned
in this bottle, and will throw thee here into the sea. The Marid, upon
this, cried out, and said, I conjure thee by Allah, O fisherman, that
thou do it not: spare me in generosity, and be not angry with me for
what I did; but if I have done evil, do thou good, according to the
proverb,--O thou benefactor of him who hath done evil, the action that
he hath done is sufficient for him:--do not therefore as Umameh did to
'Atikeh.--And what, said the fisherman, was their case? The 'Efreet
answered, This is not a time for telling stories, when I am in this
prison; but when thou liberatest me, I will relate to thee their
case. The fisherman said, Thou must be thrown into the sea, and
there shall be no way of escape for thee from it; for I endeavoured to
propitiate thee, and humbled myself before thee, yet thou wouldest
nothing but my destruction, though I had committed no offence to deserve
it, and had done no evil to thee whatever, but only good, delivering
thee from thy confinement; and when thou didst thus unto me, I perceived
that thou wast radically corrupt: and I would have thee know, that my
motive for throwing thee into this sea, is, that I may acquaint with thy
story every one that shall take thee out, and caution him against thee,
that he may cast thee in again: thus shalt thou remain in this sea to
the end of time, and experience varieties of torment.--The 'Efreet then
said, Liberate me, for this is an opportunity for thee to display
humanity; and I vow to thee that I will never do thee harm; but, on the
contrary, will do thee a service that shall enrich thee for ever.

Upon this the fisherman accepted his covenant that he would not hurt
him, but that he would do him good; and when he had bound him by oaths
and vows, and made him swear by the Most Great Name of God, he opened to
him; and the smoke ascended until it had all come forth, and then
collected together, and became, as before, an 'Efreet of hideous form.
The 'Efreet then kicked the bottle into the sea. When the fisherman saw
him do this, he made sure of destruction, and said, This is no sign of
good:--but afterwards he fortified his heart, and said, O 'Efreet, God,
whose name be exalted, hath said, Perform the covenant, for the covenant
shall be inquired into:--and thou has covenanted with me, and
sworn that thou wilt not act treacherously towards me; therefore, if
thou so act, God will recompense thee; for He is jealous; He respiteth,
but suffereth not to escape; and remember that I said to thee as said
the sage Dooban to King Yoonan, Spare me, and so may God spare thee.

The 'Efreet laughed, and, walking on before him, said, O fisherman,
follow me. The fisherman did so, not believing in his escape, until they
had quitted the neighbourhood of the city, and ascended a mountain, and
descended into a wide desert tract, in the midst of which was a lake of
water. Here the 'Efreet stopped, and ordered the fisherman to cast his
net and take some fish; and the fisherman, looking into the lake, saw in
it fish of different colours, white and red and blue and yellow; at
which he was astonished; and he cast his net, and drew it in, and found
in it four fish, each fish of a different colour from the others, at the
sight of which he rejoiced. The 'Efreet then said to him, Take them to
the Sulan, and present them to him, and he will give thee
what will enrich thee; and for the sake of God accept my excuse, for, at
present, I know no other way of rewarding thee, having been in the sea a
thousand and eight hundred years, and not seen the surface of the earth
until now: but take not fish from the lake more than once each day: and
now I commend thee to the care of God.--Having thus said, he struck the
earth with his feet, and it clove asunder, and swallowed him.



The fisherman then went back to the city, wondering at all that had
befallen him with the 'Efreet, and carried the fish to his house; and he
took an earthen bowl, and, having filled it with water, put the fish
into it; and they struggled in the water: and when he had done this, he
placed the bowl upon his head, and repaired to the King's palace, as the
'Efreet had commanded him, and, going up unto the King, presented to him
the fish; and the King was excessively astonished at them, for he had
never seen any like them in the course of his life; and he said, Give
these fish to the slave cook-maid. This maid had been sent as a present
to him by the King of the Greeks, three days before; and he had not yet
tried her skill. The Wezeer, therefore, ordered her to fry the fish, and
said to her, O maid, the King saith unto thee, I have not reserved my
tear but for the time of my difficulty:--to-day, then, gratify us by a
specimen of thy excellent cookery, for a person hath brought these fish
as a present to the Sulan. After having thus charged her, the Wezeer
returned, and the King ordered him to give the fisherman four hundred
pieces of gold: so the Wezeer gave them to him; and he took them in his
lap, and returned to his home and his wife, joyful and happy, and bought
what was needful for his family.



Such were the events that befell the fisherman: now we must relate what
happened to the maid.--She took the fish, and cleaned them, and arranged
them in the frying-pan, and left them until one side was cooked, when
she turned them upon the other side; and lo, the wall of the kitchen
clove asunder, and there came forth from it a damsel of tall stature,
smooth-cheeked, of perfect form, with eyes adorned with
kol, beautiful in countenance, and with heavy, swelling
hips; wearing a koofeeyeh interwoven with blue silk; with
rings in her ears, and bracelets on her wrists, and rings set with
precious jewels on her fingers; and in her hand was a rod of Indian
cane: and she dipped the end of the rod in the frying-pan, and said, O
fish, are ye remaining faithful to your covenant? At the sight of this,
the cook-maid fainted. The damsel then repeated the same words a second
and a third time; after which the fish raised their heads from the
frying-pan, and answered, Yes, yes. They then repeated the following
verse:--

  If thou return, we return; and if thou come, we come; and if thou
    forsake, we verily do the same.

And upon this the damsel overturned the frying-pan, and departed by the
way she had entered, and the wall of the kitchen closed up again. The
cook-maid then arose, and beheld the four fish burnt like charcoal; and
she exclaimed, In his first encounter his staff broke!--and as she sat
reproaching herself, she beheld the Wezeer standing at her head; and he
said to her, Bring the fish to the Sulan:--and she wept, and informed
him of what had happened.



The Wezeer was astonished at her words, and exclaimed, This is indeed a
wonderful event;--and he sent for the fisherman, and when he was
brought, he said to him, O fisherman, thou must bring to us four fish
like those which thou broughtest before. The fisherman accordingly went
forth to the lake, and threw his net, and when he had drawn it in he
found in it four fish as before; and he took them to the Wezeer, who
went with them to the maid, and said to her, Rise, and fry them in my
presence, that I may witness this occurrence. The maid, therefore,
prepared the fish, and put them in the frying-pan, and they had remained
but a little while, when the wall clove asunder, and the damsel
appeared, clad as before, and holding the rod; and she dipped the end of
the rod in the frying-pan, and said, O fish, O fish, are ye remaining
faithful to your old covenant? Upon which they raised their heads, and
answered as before; and the damsel overturned the frying-pan with the
rod, and returned by the way she had entered, and the wall closed up
again.

The Wezeer then said, This is an event which cannot be concealed from
the King:--so he went to him, and informed him of what had happened in
his presence; and the King said, I must see this with my own eyes. He
sent, therefore, to the fisherman, and commanded him to bring four fish
like the former; granting him a delay of three days. And the fisherman
repaired to the lake, and brought the fish thence to the King, who
ordered again that four hundred pieces of gold should be given to him;
and then, turning to the Wezeer, said to him, Cook the fish thyself here
before me. The Wezeer answered, I hear and obey. He brought the
frying-pan, and, after he had cleaned the fish, threw them into it; and
as soon as he had turned them, the wall clove asunder, and there came
forth from it a negro, in size like a bull, or like one of the tribe of
'Ad, having in his hand a branch of a green tree; and he said,
with a clear but terrifying voice, O fish, O fish, are ye remaining
faithful to your old covenant? Upon which they raised their heads, and
answered as before, Yes, yes:

  If thou return, we return; and if thou come, we come; and if thou
    forsake, we verily do the same.

The black then approached the frying-pan, and overturned it with the
branch, and the fish became like charcoal, and he went away as he had
come.

When he had thus disappeared from before their eyes, the King said, This
is an event respecting which it is impossible to keep silence, and there
must, undoubtedly, be some strange circumstance connected with these
fish. He then ordered that the fisherman should be brought before him,
and when he had come, he said to him, Whence came these fish? The
fisherman answered, From a lake between four mountains behind this
mountain which is without thy city. The King said to him, How many days'
journey distant? He answered, O our lord the Sulan, a
journey of half-an-hour. And the Sulan was astonished, and ordered his
troops to go out immediately with him and the fisherman, who began to
curse the 'Efreet. They proceeded until they had ascended the mountain,
and descended into a wide desert tract which they had never before seen
in their whole lives; and the Sulan and all the troops wondered at the
sight of this desert, which was between four mountains, and at the fish,
which were of four colours, red and white and yellow and blue. The King
paused in astonishment, and said to the troops, and to the other
attendants who were with him, Hath any one of you before seen this lake
in this place? They all answered, No. Then said the King, By Allah, I
will not enter my city, nor will I sit upon my throne, until I know the
true history of this lake, and of its fish. And upon this he ordered
his people to encamp around these mountains; and they did so. He then
called for the Wezeer, who was a well-informed, sensible, prudent, and
learned man; and when he had presented himself before him, he said to
him, I desire to do a thing with which I will acquaint thee; and it is
this:--I have resolved to depart alone this night, to seek for
information respecting this lake and its fish: therefore, sit thou at
the door of my pavilion, and say to the Emeers and Wezeers and
Chamberlains, The Sulan is sick, and hath commanded me not to allow any
person to go in unto him:--and acquaint no one with my intention.

The Wezeer was unable to oppose his design; so the King disguised
himself, and slung on his sword, and withdrew himself from the midst of
his troops. He journeyed the whole of the night, until the morning, and
proceeded until the heat became oppressive to him: he then paused to
rest; after which he again proceeded the remainder of the day and the
second night until the morning, when there appeared before him, in the
distance, something black, at the sight of which he rejoiced, and said,
Perhaps I shall there find some person who will inform me of the history
of the lake and its fish. And when he approached this black object, he
found it to be a palace built of black stones, and overlaid with iron;
and one of the leaves of its doors was open, and the other shut. The
King was glad, and he stood at the door, and knocked gently, but heard
no answer; he knocked a second and a third time, but again heard no
answer: then he knocked a fourth time, and with violence; but no one
answered. So he said, It is doubtless empty:--and he took courage, and
entered from the door into the passage, and cried out, saying, O
inhabitants of the palace, I am a stranger and a traveller! have ye any
provision? And he repeated these words a second and a third time; but
heard no answer. And upon this he fortified his heart, and emboldened
himself, and proceeded from the passage into the midst of the palace;
but he found no one there, and only saw that it was furnished, and that
there was, in the centre of it, a fountain with four lions of red gold,
which poured forth the water from their mouths, like pearls and jewels:
around this were birds; and over the top of the palace was extended a
net which prevented their flying out. At the sight of these objects he
was astonished, and he was grieved that he saw no person there whom he
could ask for information respecting the lake, and the fish, and the
mountains, and the palace. He then sat down between the doors,
reflecting upon these things; and as he thus sat, he heard a voice of
lamentation from a sorrowful heart, chanting these verses:--

  O fortune, thou pitiest me not, nor releasest me! See my heart is
    straitened between affliction and peril!
  Will not you  have compassion on the mighty whom love
    hath abased, and the wealthy who is reduced to indigence?
  We were jealous even of the zephyr which passed over you: but when
    the divine decree is issued, the eye becometh blind!
  What resource hath the archer when, in the hour of conflict,
    he desireth to discharge the arrow, but findeth his bow-string
    broken.
  And when troubles are multiplied upon the noble-minded, where shall
    he find refuge from fate and from destiny?

When the Sulan heard this lamentation, he sprang upon his feet, and,
seeking the direction whence it proceeded, found a curtain suspended
before the door of a chamber; and he raised it, and beheld behind it a
young man sitting on a couch raised to the height of a cubit from the
floor. He was a handsome youth, well-shaped, and of eloquent speech,
with shining forehead, and rosy cheek, marked with a mole resembling
ambergris. The King was rejoiced at seeing him, and saluted him; and the
young man (who remained sitting, and was clad with a vest of silk,
embroidered with gold, but who exhibited traces of grief) returned his
salutation, and said to him, O my master, excuse my not rising.--O
youth! said the King, inform me respecting the lake, and its fish of
various colours, and respecting this palace, and the reason of thy being
alone in it, and of thy lamentation. When the young man heard these
words, tears trickled down his cheeks, and he wept bitterly.
And the King was astonished, and said to him, What causeth thee to weep,
O youth? He answered, How can I refrain from weeping, when this is my
state?--and so saying, he stretched forth his hand, and lifted up the
skirts of his clothing; and lo, half of him, from his waist to the soles
of his feet, was stone; and from his waist to the hair of his head, he
was like other men. He then said, Know, O King, that the story of the
fish is extraordinary; if it were engraved upon the intellect, it would
be a lesson to him who would be admonished:--and he related as
follows:--