When the storks heard this through their chasm in the wall, they
became almost beside themselves with joy. They ran so quickly with
their long feet to the door of the ruin, that the owl could scarcely
keep up with them. Thereupon spoke the Caliph to her: "Preserver of my
life and that of my friend, in token of our eternal thanks for what
thou hast done for us, take me as thy husband." Then he turned to the
East: three times they bowed their long necks towards the sun, which
was even now rising above the mountains, and at the same moment
exclaimed "MUTABOR!" In a twinkling they were restored, and in the
excessive joy of their newly-bestowed life, alternately laughing and
weeping, were folded in each other's arms. But who can describe their
astonishment when they looked around? A beautiful woman, attired as a
queen, stood before them. Smiling, she gave the Caliph her hand, and
said, "Know you your screech-owl no longer?" It was she; the Caliph
was in such transports at her beauty and pleasantness, as to cry out,
that it was the most fortunate moment in his life, when he became a
stork.

The three now proceeded together to Bagdad. The Caliph found in his
dress, not only the box of magic powder, but also his money-bag. By
means thereof, he purchased at the nearest village what was necessary
for their journey, and accordingly they soon appeared before the gates
of the city. Here, however, the arrival of the Caliph excited great
astonishment. They had given out that he was dead, and the people were
therefore highly rejoiced to have again their beloved lord.

So much the more, however, burned their hatred against the impostor
Mizra. They proceeded to the palace, and caught the old magician and
his son. The old man the Caliph sent to the same chamber in the ruin,
which the princess, as a screech-owl, had inhabited, and there had
him hung; unto the son, however, who understood nothing of his
father's arts, he gave his choice,--to die, or snuff some of the
powder. Having chosen the latter, the Grand-Vizier presented him the
box. A hearty pinch, and the magic word of the Caliph converted him
into a stork. Chasid had him locked up in an iron cage, and hung in
his garden.

Long and happily lived Caliph Chasid with his spouse, the Princess;
his pleasantest hours were always those, when in the afternoon the
Vizier sought him; and whenever the Caliph was in a very good humor,
he would let himself down so far, as to show Mansor how he looked,
when a stork. He would gravely march along, with rigid feet, up and
down the chamber, make a clattering noise, wave his arms like wings,
and show how, in vain, he had prostrated himself to the East, and
cried out, MU--MU. To the Princess and her children, this imitation
always afforded great amusement: when, however, the Caliph clattered,
and bowed, and cried out, too long, then the Vizier would threaten him
that he would disclose to his spouse what had been proposed outside
the door of the Princess Screech-owl!