Now, as to asan Bedr-ed-Deen of El-Barah, he left the humpback and the
'Efreet contending together, and, entering the house, seated himself in
the bride-chamber; and lo, the bride approached, accompanied by an old
woman, who stopped at the door of the chamber, and said, O
Aboo-Shihab, rise, and take thy bride; and I commend thee to
the care of Allah. Then the old woman went away, and the bride, whose
name was Sitt-el-osn, advanced to the upper end of the
chamber. Her heart was broken, and she said within herself, By Allah, I
will not suffer him to caress me though my spirit depart from me! But
when she had proceeded to the upper end of the chamber, she beheld
Bedr-ed-Deen, and said, My beloved, until this hour art thou remaining?
I had said within myself, perhaps thou and the humpbacked groom are to
share me between you.--What, said he, should give the groom access to
thee, and wherefore should he be my partner in the possession of
thee?--Who, then, she asked, is my husband? Thou or he?--O my mistress,
answered Bedr-ed-Deen, we did not this for any other purpose than to
make a jest of him, and that we might laugh at him; for when the
tire-women and the singing-women and thy family beheld thine admirable
beauty, they feared for us the effect of the eye, and thy father hired
him for ten pieces of gold, in order that he might divert from us the
eye; and now he hath departed. When Sitt-el-osn heard these words of
Bedr-ed-Deen, she smiled, and uttered a gentle laugh, and said, By
Allah, thou hast extinguished my fire! Take me then, I conjure thee, and
press me to thy bosom.--And they embraced each other.

Not long after this, the 'Efreet said to the Jinneeyeh, Arise, and place
thyself beneath the youth, and let us convey him back, lest the morning
overtake us; for the time is near. So she advanced towards him, and,
placing herself beneath his skirt, as he lay asleep, took him up, and
flew away with him, in the state in which she found him, clad only in
his shirt, and pursued her flight with the 'Efreet by her side. But God
gave permission to some angels to cast at the 'Efreet a shooting-star of
fire, and he was burnt. The Jinneeyeh, however, escaped unhurt, and
deposited Bedr-ed-Deen in the place over which the shooting-star had
burnt the 'Efreet. She would not pass beyond it, fearing for his safety;
and as destiny had appointed, this place was Damascus: so she placed him
by one of the gates of this city, and flew away.



When daylight therefore came, and the gates were opened, the people,
coming forth, beheld a beautiful youth clad in his shirt, and with a
cotton skull-cap without a turban. In consequence of his having been so
long wakeful, he was now immersed in sleep; and when the people saw him,
some said, Would that he had waited till he had put on his
clothes!--another said, Objects of pity are the children of men of
condition! Probably this youth hath just come forth from his
drinking-place, on account of some business, and intoxication hath
overcome him, and he hath wandered from the place to which he would go
until he arrived at the gate of the city, and, finding it locked, hath
slept here.--They had expressed various opinions respecting him, and
were wondering at his case, when Bedr-ed-Deen awoke. Perceiving that he
was at the gate of a city, and surrounded by men, he was astonished, and
said, Where am I, O good people; and what is the cause of your
assembling around me, and what hath befallen me among you? They
answered, We saw thee at the call to morning-prayer lying at this gate
asleep; and we know nothing more of thy case. Where wast thou sleeping
this last night?--By Allah, O people, he replied, I was sleeping this
last night in Cairo.--On hearing this, one of them said, Dost thou eat
asheesh? Another said, Thou art mad. How couldst thou be
passing the night in Cairo, and be sleeping in the morning at the city
of Damascus?--He said to them, By Allah, O good people, I will tell you
no falsehood: I was last night in the land of Egypt, and the day before
I was at El-Barah. One of them said, This is a wonderful thing! Another
said, This youth is mad. And they clapped their hands at him, and,
conversing together, said, Alas, for his youth! By Allah, there is no
denying his madness!--They then said to him, Return to thy reason. But
he replied, I was yesterday a bridegroom in the land of Egypt.--Probably
thou hast dreamt, said they, and hast seen this of which thou speakest
in thy sleep. And asan was confounded, and said, By Allah, this was not
a dream: and where is the humpbacked groom who was sitting with us, and
the purse of gold that I had? And where are my clothes and my
drawers?--He then rose, and entered the city, and proceeded through its
great thoroughfare-streets and market-streets; and the people crowded
round him and paraded him: so he entered the shop of a cook. Now this
cook was a robber, whom God had caused to repent of his
unlawful actions, and he had opened a cook's shop; and all the people of
Damascus feared him on account of his boldness; therefore, when they saw
that the youth had entered this shop, they left him, being afraid.

When the cook beheld asan Bedr-ed-Deen, and observed his beauty and
comeliness, love for him entered his heart, and he said to him, Whence
art thou, O young man? Relate to me thy story; for thou art become
dearer to me than my soul.--So he related to him all that had happened,
from beginning to end: and the cook said to him, O my master
Bedr-ed-Deen, know that this is a wonderful event and an extraordinary
story; but, O my son, conceal thy case until God dispel thy trouble, and
remain with me in this place; and as I have not a son, I will adopt thee
as such. Bedr-ed-Deen replied, Let it be as thou desirest, O uncle. And
immediately the cook went out to the mart, and bought for Bedr-ed-Deen
costly clothes, and put them on him: he then went to the aee, and made
a declaration that he was his adopted son: so asan
Bedr-ed-Deen became known throughout the city of Damascus as the son of
the cook; and he sat with him in the shop to receive the money, and in
this situation he remained.

Now as to Sitt-el-osn, when daybreak came and she awoke, she found not
asan Bedr-ed-Deen remaining with her, and, imagining that he would soon
return, she sat a while expecting him; and lo, her father came in to
her, troubled at that which had befallen him from the Sulan, and at his
having married his daughter by force to one of his servants, the
humpbacked groom; and he said within himself, I will kill this girl if
she have suffered the wretch to caress her. So he advanced to the
bride-chamber, and, stopping at the door, said, O Sitt-el-osn! She
answered, Well, O my master!--and came forth to him, walking with a
vacillating gait, through joy, and kissed the ground before him; and her
countenance beamed with increased splendour in consequence of her union
with that gazelle. When her father, therefore, saw her in this state, he
exclaimed to her, O thou base creature! art thou delighted with this
groom? On hearing these words of her father, Sitt-el-osn smiled, and
replied, By Allah, it is enough that thou hast done, and that the people
laugh at me, and put me on an equality with this groom, who is not, in
my estimation, of the value of a paring of one of my finger-nails; but
as to my husband--by Allah, I never in the course of my life passed a
night more delightful than that which I have just passed in his company:
therefore jest not with me by mentioning that humpback.--When her father
heard what she said he was filled with rage; his eyes glared so that
little appeared of them but the white, and he said to her, Wo to thee!
What are these words that thou sayest? Verily the humpbacked groom hath
passed the night with thee!--I conjure thee by Allah, she rejoined, that
thou mention him not. May Allah reject him, and reject his father!
Continue not then to mock me by mentioning him; for the groom was only
hired for ten pieces of gold, and he took his hire and departed; and I
came and entered the bride-chamber, and beheld my husband seated, after
the singing-women had displayed me before him; and he threw them red
gold until he had enriched the poor who were present. I have reclined
upon the bosom of my gentle-hearted husband, with the black eyes and the
joined eyebrows.--When her father heard this, the light became darkness
before his face, and he exclaimed to her, O thou abandoned one! What is
this that thou sayest? Where is thy reason?--O my father, she replied,
thou hast broken my heart in pieces! Wherefore dost thou pay no
attention? This of whom I spake is my husband, and he hath retired to
his private closet.

So her father went thither, in a state of astonishment, and, entering
the closet, found the humpbacked groom with his head upon the slabs and
his feet turned upwards; and the Wezeer was confounded at the sight, and
said, Is not this the humpback?--and he spoke to him; but the humpback
returned no answer, thinking that it was the 'Efreet who addressed him.
The Wezeer, therefore, cried out at him with a loud voice, and said to
him, Speak, or I will cut off thy head with this sword! Upon which the
humpback exclaimed, By Allah, O sheykh of the 'Efreets, from the time
that thou placedst me here I have not raised my head: I conjure thee
therefore that thou shew favour to me!--The Wezeer, on hearing the
humpback thus address him, said to him, What sayest thou? I am the
father of the bride, and I am not an 'Efreet.--Then said the humpback,
My life is not in thy hand, nor art thou able to take my soul; so go thy
way before he come to thee who hath treated me in this manner. Ye would
not marry me to any but the mistress of buffaloes and the mistress of
'Efreets! May Allah, then, confound him who married me to her, and
confound him who was the cause of it!--Then did the humpbacked groom
address the Wezeer, the father of the bride, again, saying, Allah
confound him who was the cause of this!--Rise, said the Wezeer, and
depart from this place.--Am I mad, he replied, that I should go with
thee without the permission of the 'Efreet? For he said to me, When the
sun shall have risen go thy way.--Hath the sun then risen or not? For I
cannot depart from my place until the sun hath risen.--Upon this the
Wezeer said to him, Who brought thee to this place? He answered, I came
hither yesterday, and a dust rose from the midst of the water, and cried
out, and increased in bulk until it became of the size of a buffalo, and
said to me words that entered my ear. Leave me, therefore, and go. Allah
confound the bride and him who married me to her!--The Wezeer then
approached him, and dragged him forth, and he went out running, doubting
whether the sun had risen, and went up to the Sulan, and informed him
of that which had happened to him with the 'Efreet.

But as to the Wezeer, the father of the bride, he returned with his
reason perplexed respecting the case of his daughter, and said to her, O
my daughter, reveal to me thy story. She replied, The elegant person
before whom I was displayed remained with me; and if thou believe me
not, see this is his turban, twisted just as it was, upon the
chair, and his drawers are under the bed, and in them is
something wrapped up: I know not what it is. So, when her father heard
this, he entered the bride-chamber, and found the turban of asan
Bedr-ed-Deen, the son of his brother; and taking it up, he turned it
over, and said, This is such a turban as is worn by Wezeers, except that
it is of the Moilee kind. He then observed an amulet sewed
in his red cloth cap; and he unsewed it; and he took the drawers, and
found the purse containing the thousand pieces of gold, and, opening
this, he discovered in it a paper, which, when he had read it he saw to
be a copy of the Jew's contract, with the name of asan Bedr-ed-Deen the
son of Noor-ed-Deen of Cairo; and he found also the thousand pieces of
gold. But when he read the paper he cried aloud and fell down in a
swoon; and as soon as he recovered, and understood the case, he was
astonished, and exclaimed, There is no deity but God, who is able to do
whatsoever He willeth! Then said he, O my daughter, knowest thou who
hath become thy husband? She answered, No.--He is the son of my brother,
said he, and the son of thine uncle; and these thousand pieces of gold
are thy dowry. Extolled be the perfection of God! Would that I knew how
this event hath happened!--Then he opened the amulet that was sewed up,
and found in it a paper written by the hand of his brother Noor-ed-Deen
of Cairo, the father of asan Bedr-ed-Deen: and when he beheld the
hand-writing of his brother he repeated this couplet:--

  I behold their footsteps, and melt with desire, and pour forth
    my tears upon the places they have trodden,
  Begging of Him who hath afflicted me by their separation,
    that He will bless me some day by a reunion.



So saying, he read the paper, and found in it the date of his marriage
to the daughter of the Wezeer of El-Barah, and that of his first
introduction to her, and a record of his age at the time of his death,
and the date of the birth of his son asan Bedr-ed-Deen; and he
wondered, and shook with delight; and, comparing what had happened to
his brother with the events that had happened to himself, he found that
they corresponded exactly: his marriage and the marriage of his brother
agreed in date, and their first visits to their respective wives in like
manner; as also the birth of Bedr-ed-Deen, the son of his brother, and
the birth of his daughter Sitt-el-osn. He took the two papers, and,
going up with them to the Sulan, he acquainted him with all that had
happened from the first of the case to the last; and the King was
astonished, and ordered that the case should be immediately recorded.
The Wezeer then remained in expectation of the son of his brother; but
he met with no tidings of him: so he said, By Allah, I will do a deed
that none hath done before me:--and he took an ink-case and a pen, and
wrote an inventory of the furniture of the house, describing the
money-chest as having been in such a place, and a certain curtain in
such another place, and everything in the house in like manner; and he
folded up the paper, and ordered that all the furniture should be stored
up; and he took the turban with its arboosh, and also the farajeeyeh
and the purse, and kept them himself.

After this, in due time, the daughter of the Wezeer gave birth to a son
like the moon, resembling his father in beauty and symmetry and
splendour and loveliness. They received him from his mother, and
blackened the edges of his eyes with kol, and delivered him
to the nurses, and named him 'Ajeeb. His day was as a month;
and his month, as a year; and when seven years had passed
over him, his grandfather committed him to a schoolmaster, whom he
charged to educate him with great care. He continued at the school four
years, and used to fight with his schoolfellows, and abuse them, saying
to them, Who among you is like me? I am the son of the Wezeer of
Cairo.--So the boys went together to complain to the monitor of that
which they suffered from 'Ajeeb; and the monitor said to them, I will
teach you something to say to him when he cometh, and he shall repent of
his coming to the school; and it is this: to-morrow, when he is come,
seat yourselves around him, and say to one another, By Allah, none shall
play with us at this game excepting him who shall tell us the name of
his mother and that of his father; and he who knoweth not the name of
his mother and that of his father is illegitimate; therefore he shall
not play with us. Accordingly, on the following morning they came to the
school, and 'Ajeeb was there; and the boys surrounded him, and said as
the monitor had directed them, and they all agreed to the proposal; and
one said, My name is Majid, and my mother is 'Alawee, and my father is
'Ezz-ed-Deen:--then another said after the same manner, and another, and
so on, until the turn came to 'Ajeeb; and he said to them, My name is
'Ajeeb, and my mother is Sitt-el-osn, and my father is Shems-ed-Deen,
the Wezeer of Cairo:--and they said to him, By Allah, the Wezeer is not
thy father. 'Ajeeb replied, the Wezeer is my father indeed:--and upon
this the boys laughed at him, and clapped their hands at him, saying,
Thou knowest not who is thy father: get away from us, therefore; for
none shall play with us excepting him who knoweth the name of his
father:--and immediately the boys dispersed from around him, and made a
jest of him. In consequence of this treatment his heart became
contracted, and he was almost choked with crying; and the monitor said
to him, Dost thou really consider as thy father him who is thy
grandfather, the Wezeer, the father of thy mother Sitt-el-osn? Thy
father thou knowest not, nor do we know him; for the Sulan married her
to the humpbacked groom, and the Jinn came and prevented him: so, if
thou know not thy father, they will regard thee among them as
illegitimate. Dost thou not see that the son of the woman who is coveted
as a wife knoweth his father? The Wezeer of Cairo is thy grandfather;
and as to thy father, we know him not, nor dost thou: return therefore
to thy reason.



Upon this, 'Ajeeb went immediately to his mother, Sitt-el-osn, and
complained to her, and wept; and his weeping prevented his speaking: and
when his mother heard his complaint and his crying, her heart was
inflamed for him, and she said to him, O my son, what maketh thee weep?
Tell me thy story.--So he told her what he had heard from the boys and
from the monitor, and said to her, O my mother, who is my father? She
answered him, Thy father is the Wezeer of Cairo. But he said, He is not
my father: tell me not, therefore, what is false; for the Wezeer is thy
father; not mine: who then is my father? If thou do not tell me truly; I
will kill myself with this dagger.--And when his mother heard the
mention of his father, she wept at the allusion to the son of her uncle,
and remembering the amiable qualities of asan Bedr-ed-Deen of
El-Barah, and what had happened to herself and him, she recited an ode
commencing thus:--

  They excited love in my heart, and departed; and far distant hath
    their abode become!
  Reason forsook me when they withdrew, and sleep and patience
    abandoned me.

And she wept and cried out, and her son did the same; and lo, the Wezeer
entered. His heart burned within him when he beheld their state, and he
said to them, What causeth you to weep? She acquainted him therefore
with the treatment that her son had experienced from the other boys of
the school; and he, also, wept, and called to mind what had happened to
his brother and himself and his daughter, and he knew not the mystery of
the case. Then suddenly he arose, and, going up to the council-chamber,
presented himself before the King, and related to him the story, begging
his permission to travel eastwards to the city of El-Barah, that he
might make inquiries respecting the son of his brother; and requesting
also of the Sulan that he would write letters for him to all the
countries through which he might pass, that, if he found the son of his
brother in any place, he might take him away. And he wept before the
Sulan, and the heart of the King was moved with compassion for him, and
he wrote for him letters to all the regions and countries; upon which
the Wezeer rejoiced, and, having offered up a prayer for the Sulan,
took leave of him.

He descended immediately and prepared for the journey, and, taking with
him all that he required, together with his daughter and her son 'Ajeeb,
travelled the first day and the second and the third, and proceeded
until he arrived at the city of Damascus, and beheld it with its trees
and streams celebrated by the poets. He alighted in the open space
called Meydan el-aba; and, when he had pitched his tents, said to his
servants, We will take rest here two days. So the servants entered the
city to gratify their various desires; one to sell, another to buy, a
third to enter the bath, and a fourth to visit the mosque of the
Benee-Umeiyeh, which hath not in the world its equal. 'Ajeeb also
entered the city, accompanied by his eunuch, in order to amuse
themselves; and the eunuch walked behind 'Ajeeb, having in his hand a
whip that would strike down a camel. And when the people of Damascus
beheld 'Ajeeb, and his elegance of form and perfect beauty, and observed
him to be endowed with admirable loveliness, and with kindness of
manner, more bland than the northern zephyr, sweeter than limpid water
to the thirsty, and more pleasant than health to the diseased, they
followed him, running after him in crowds; and some sat waiting in the
streets to see him pass. Thus did they until the slave, as destiny had
ordained, stopped before the shop of 'Ajeeb's father, asan
Bedr-ed-Deen, in which the cook who had acknowledged him as his adopted
son in the presence of the aees and witnesses had established him; and
this cook had died, and left him all his property, together with his
shop.

When the slave stopped there on this day, the servants also stopped with
him: and asan Bedr-ed-Deen beheld his son, and was charmed with him,
observing his extreme beauty: his soul yearned towards him with natural
sympathy, and his heart clung to him. He had just prepared a conserve of
pomegranate-grains, sweetened with sugar; and the affection divinely
inspired increased in him; so he called out in ecstasy, and said, O my
master, O thou who hast captivated my heart and soul, and to whom my
affections are drawn by sympathy! wilt thou come in to me and refresh my
heart and eat of my food? And when he had said this, his eyes overflowed
with involuntary tears, and he reflected upon his past experience and
his condition at the present time. When 'Ajeeb heard the address of his
father, his heart was in like manner drawn towards him by sympathy, and
he looked towards the eunuch, and said to him, Verily my heart is moved
with sympathy for this cook: he seemeth to have parted with a son: come
in with us, therefore, that we may refresh his heart and eat his
offering of hospitality: perhaps God, through our so doing, may
accomplish our union with our father. But the eunuch replied, By Allah,
O my master, it is not proper. How should we, who are of the family of
the Wezeer, eat in the shop of a cook? I will, however, drive away the
people from thee, lest they see thee: otherwise it will be impossible
for thee to enter the shop. On hearing the reply of the eunuch,
Bedr-ed-Deen was surprised, and, looking towards him, while his tears
flowed down his cheeks, said to him, Verily my heart loveth him.--Let us
hear no more of these words, said the eunuch:--and he desired the youth
not to enter: but the father of 'Ajeeb cast his eyes upon the eunuch,
and said, Great sir, wherefore wilt thou not refresh my heart and come
in to me? O thou who resemblest black dust, but whose heart is white! O
thou who hast been described in such and such terms of praise!--so that
the eunuch laughed, and said, What wouldst thou say? Speak, and be
brief.--And Bedr-ed-Deen recited this couplet:--

  Were it not for his accomplishments and admirable faithfulness,
    he had not been invested with authority in the abode of Kings.
  What an excellent guardian for the areem is he! On account
    of his beauty the angels of heaven wait upon him!

This address pleased the eunuch so much that he took the hand of 'Ajeeb,
and entered the cook's shop; and Bedr-ed-Deen ladled out a saucerful of
conserve of pomegranate-grains prepared with almonds and sugar, and the
slave and the youth ate together; Bedr-ed-Deen saying to them, Ye have
delighted me by your company: eat, and may it benefit you! 'Ajeeb then
said to his father, Sit down and eat with us; and perhaps God will unite
us to him whom we desire. And Bedr-ed-Deen said, O my son, hast thou
been afflicted in thy tender years by the separation of those whom thou
lovest?--Yes, O uncle, answered 'Ajeeb: my heart is inflamed by the
absence of one of those who are dear to me: the friend who hath
withdrawn himself from me is my father, and I and my grandfather have
come abroad to search for him through the world; and how do I sigh for
my union with him!--And he wept bitterly; and his father, moved by his
tears, wept with him, reflecting upon his own desolate state, separated
from those he loved, deprived of his father, and far removed from his
mother; and the eunuch was moved with compassion for him.



They all ate together until they were satisfied; after which, the youth
and the slave arose, and quitted the shop of Bedr-ed-Deen, who felt as
if his soul had departed from his body and gone with them. He could not
endure their absence for the twinkling of an eye; so he shut up his shop
and followed them, though ignorant that the youth was his son, and
walked quickly until he came up to them before they had gone out from
the great gate; whereupon the eunuch, looking back at him, said, What
dost thou want, O cook? Bedr-ed-Deen answered, When ye departed from me,
I felt as if my soul had quitted my body, and, having some business in
the suburb, I was desirous of accompanying you to transact my business,
and, after that, to return. But the eunuch was angry, and said to
'Ajeeb, Verily this repast was unlucky: respectful treatment hath become
incumbent on us; and see, he is following us from place to place. 'Ajeeb
therefore looked round, and, seeing the cook, was enraged, and his face
became red; but he said to the eunuch, Suffer him to walk in the public
road of the Muslims; but when we shall have turned from it to our tents,
if he do the same, and we know that he is following us, we will drive
him back. And he hung down his head and went on, with the eunuch behind
him. Bedr-ed-Deen, however, followed them to the Meydan el-aba, and
when they had drawn near to the tents they looked back and saw him
behind them; and 'Ajeeb was angry, fearing that the eunuch might inform
his grandfather, and lest it should be said that he had entered the
cook's shop, and that the cook had followed him. He looked at him till
his eyes met the eye of his father, who had become as a body without a
soul; and he fancied that his eye bore an expression of deceit, and that
he was perhaps a knave: so his anger increased, and he took up a stone,
and threw it at his father, and the stone struck him on the forehead,
and wounded him, and he fell down in a swoon, the blood flowing over his
face. 'Ajeeb went on with the eunuch to the tents; and asan
Bedr-ed-Deen, when he recovered his senses, wiped off the blood, and,
having cut off a piece of linen from his turban, bound up his head with
it, blaming himself, and saying, I wronged the youth when I shut up my
shop and followed him, so he thought I was a deceiver. He then returned
to his shop, and occupied himself with the sale of his meats; and he
yearned with desire for his mother, who was at El-Barah.

The Wezeer, his uncle, remained at Damascus three days, and then
departed to em, and, having entered this town, proceeded thence,
inquiring at every place where he halted in his journey until he had
arrived at Marideen and El-Mosil and Diyar Bekr. He continued his
journey until he arrived at the city of El-Barah, and when he had
entered it and taken up his quarters, he went and presented himself
before the Sulan, who received him with respect and honour, and
inquired the reason of his coming: so he acquainted him with his story,
and informed him that the Wezeer 'Alee Noor-ed-Deen was his brother. The
Sulan ejaculated, God have mercy upon him!--and said, O
aeb, he was my Wezeer, and I loved him much: he died
twelve years ago, and left a son; but we have lost him, and
have heard no tidings of him: his mother, however, is with us, for she
is the daughter of my old Wezeer. On hearing from the King that the
mother of his nephew was alive, the Wezeer Shems-ed-Deen rejoiced, and
said, I am desirous of having an interview with her. And the King gave
him immediate permission to visit her at his brother's house: so he went
thither, and kissed the threshold, and, entering an open court, found a
door over-arched with hard stone inlaid with various kinds of marble of
every colour; and he walked along by the walls of the house, and as he
cast his eyes around upon them he observed the name of his brother
Noor-ed-Deen inscribed on them in characters of gold; and he went to the
name, and kissed it, and wept. He then advanced to the saloon of his
brother's wife, the mother of asan Bedr-ed-Deen of El-Barah. During
the absence of her son she had given herself up to weeping and wailing
night and day; and after she had long suffered from his separation she
made for her son a tomb of marble in the midst of the saloon, where she
wept for him night and day, sleeping nowhere but by this tomb. And when
Shems-ed-Deen arrived at her apartment he heard her voice apostrophizing
the tomb; and while she was thus occupied he entered and saluted her,
and informed her that he was her husband's brother, acquainting her with
what had passed, and revealing to her the particulars of the story. He
told her that her son asan Bedr-ed-Deen had passed a whole night with
his daughter, and disappeared in the morning, and that his daughter had
borne him a son, whom he had brought with him: and when she heard this
news of her son, and that he was perhaps still living, and beheld her
husband's brother, she fell at his feet and kissed them, addressing him
with this couplet:--

  Divinely is he inspired who acquainteth me with their approach;
    for he hath brought information most delightful to be heard.
  If he would be satisfied with that which is cast off,
    I would give him a heart rent in pieces at the hour
    of valediction.

The Wezeer then sent to bring 'Ajeeb; and when he came, his grandmother
rose to him, and embraced him, and wept; but Shems-ed-Deen said to her,
This is not a time for weeping, but rather a time for preparing thyself
to accompany us on our return to the land of Egypt: and perhaps God may
unite us with thy son, my nephew. She replied, I hear and obey:--and,
arising immediately, collected all her property and treasures, and her
female slaves, and forthwith prepared herself: after which the Wezeer,
Shems-ed-Deen, went up again to the Sulan of El-Barah, and took leave
of him; and the King sent with him presents and rarities for the Sulan
of Egypt.



The Wezeer departed without delay, accompanied by his brother's wife,
and continued his journey until he arrived at the city of Damascus,
where he alighted again, and encamped, and said to his attendants, We
will remain at Damascus a week, to buy, for the Sulan, presents and
rarities. 'Ajeeb then said to the eunuch, Boy, I long for a
little diversion: arise, therefore, and let us go to the market of
Damascus, and see what is going on there, and what hath happened to that
cook whose confection we ate and whose head we broke, notwithstanding he
had treated us with kindness: we acted ill towards him. The eunuch
replied, I hear and obey:--and 'Ajeeb went forth with him from the
tents, the tie of blood inciting him to visit his father and they
entered the city, and proceeded to the shop of the cook, whom they found
standing there. It was then near the time of afternoon-prayers; and it
happened that he had again just prepared a confection of
pomegranate-grains; and when they drew near to him, the heart of 'Ajeeb
yearned towards him when he saw him, and he perceived the scar
occasioned by the stone that he had thrown. He said to him, Peace be on
thee! Know that my heart is with thee.--And when Bedr-ed-Deen beheld
him, his affections were engrossed by him, and his heart throbbed with
emotion towards him, and he hung down his head, desiring to adapt his
tongue to speech, and unable to do so: but presently he raised his head,
and, looking towards the youth in an humble and abject manner, recited
these verses:--

  I wished for my beloved; but when I beheld him I was confounded
    and possessed neither tongue nor eye.
  I hung down my head in honour and reverence, and would have hidden
    what I felt; but it would not be concealed.
  I had prepared a volume of expostulation; but when we met
    I remembered not a word.

He then said to them, Refresh ye my heart, and eat of my food; for, by
Allah, as soon as I beheld thee, my heart yearned towards thee, and I
had not followed thee unless I had been deprived of my reason.--By
Allah, replied 'Ajeeb, thou dost indeed love us, and we ate a morsel
with thee; but after it thou keptest close behind us and wouldst have
disgraced us: we will not eat again with thee, therefore, but on the
condition of thy swearing that thou wilt not follow us; and otherwise we
will not come to thee again henceforth; for we are staying at this city
a week, in order that my grandfather may procure presents for the
King.--I bind myself, said Bedr-ed-Deen, to do as ye desire. So 'Ajeeb
entered the shop with the eunuch, and Bedr-ed-Deen placed before them a
saucer filled with the confection of pomegranate-grains; upon which
'Ajeeb said to him, Eat with us; and may God dispel our affliction:--and
Bedr-ed-Deen was delighted, and he ate with them; but he turned not his
eyes from the youth; for his heart and all his faculties were captivated
by him. 'Ajeeb, observing this, said to him, Knowest thou not that I
told thee thou wast a rude doter? Enough of this: continue not to gaze
at my face.--Bedr-ed-Deen, therefore, apologized to him, and began to
put morsels into the mouth of 'Ajeeb, and then did the same to the
eunuch. Afterwards he poured the water upon their hands, and when they
had washed he loosed a napkin of silk from his waist and wiped them with
it. He next sprinkled rose-water upon them from a bottle that was in his
shop, and went out, and returned with two cups of sherbet prepared with
rose-water infused with musk, and, placing these before them, he said,
Complete your kindness. So 'Ajeeb took a cup and drank; and Bedr-ed-Deen
handed the other to the eunuch; and both drank until their stomachs were
full, and gratified their appetites to a degree beyond their usual
habit.



They then departed, and hastened back to the tents, and 'Ajeeb went in
to his grandmother, the mother of his father asan Bedr-ed-Deen; and she
kissed him, and said, Where hast thou been? He answered, In the city.
And she arose, and brought him a saucer of confection of
pomegranate-grains, which happened to be somewhat deficient in
sweetness; and she said to the eunuch, Sit down with thy master. The
eunuch said within himself, By Allah, we have no appetite. He, however,
seated himself, and 'Ajeeb did the same, though satiated with what he
had eaten and drunk, and dipped a morsel of bread in the confection, and
ate it; but it seemed to him insipid, on account of his being thus
cloyed, and he loathed it, and said, What is this nasty dish?--O my
child, said his grandmother, dost thou find fault with my cookery? It
was I who prepared it; and, except thy father, asan Bedr-ed-Deen, there
is none who can cook it as well as myself.--By Allah, O my mistress,
replied 'Ajeeb, This thy dish is not well prepared: we have just now
seen in the city a cook who had prepared a confection of
pomegranate-grains, but its odour was such as to dilate the heart, and
the confection itself, such as to excite appetite in one already
satiated: as to thine, in comparison with his, it is good for nothing.

His grandmother, on hearing this, fell into a violent rage, and turning
towards the eunuch, said to him, Wo to thee! Hast thou corrupted my
child? Thou hast taken him into the shops of the cooks!--The eunuch
feared, and denied, saying, We did not enter the shop, but only passed
by it:--but 'Ajeeb said, By Allah, we entered and ate, and what we ate
was better than this mess of thine. And upon this his grandmother arose,
and informed her husband's brother, and incensed him against the eunuch.
The slave was therefore brought before the Wezeer, and he said to him,
Wherefore didst thou take my child into the cook's shop? The eunuch,
fearing, said again, We did not enter.--Nay, said 'Ajeeb, we did enter,
and ate of a confection of pomegranate-grains until we were satiated,
and the cook gave us to drink sherbet with ice and sugar. The Wezeer's
anger with the eunuch now increased, and he asked him again; but still
he denied. Then said the Wezeer, If thine assertion be true, sit down
and eat before us. The eunuch therefore advanced, and would have eaten;
but he could not; and he threw down the morsel that was in his hand, and
said, O my master, I am satiated since yesterday. And by this the Wezeer
knew that he had eaten in the shop of the cook: so he ordered the female
slaves to throw him down upon the ground, and they did so, and he gave
him a severe beating, while the slave cried for mercy, but still saying,
I am satiated since yesterday! The Wezeer then interrupted the beating,
and said to him, Declare the truth. And at length the eunuch said, Know
that we did enter the shop of the cook while he was cooking
pomegranate-grains, and he ladled out for us some of the confection,
and, by Allah, I never in my life ate any like it, or any more
detestable than this which is before us.

The mother of Bedr-ed-Deen, enraged at this, said, Thou shalt go to this
cook and bring us a saucerful of his confection and shew it to thy
master, that he may say which of the two is the better and the more
delicious.--Well, replied the eunuch: and immediately she gave him a
saucer, and half a piece of gold; and he went to the shop, and said to
the cook, We have laid a wager respecting thy confection at the tent of
our master; for there is a mess of pomegranate-grains cooked by the
family: give us, therefore, for this half-piece of gold, and apply
thyself to prepare it perfectly; for we have received an excruciating
beating on account of thy cookery. Laughing at these words, Bedr-ed-Deen
replied, By Allah, none excelleth in the preparation of this confection
except myself and my mother, and she is now in a distant country. And he
ladled out as much as filled the saucer, and perfected it by the
addition of some musk and rose-water. The eunuch then hastened back with
it to the family; and the mother of asan took it, and, tasting its
delicious flavour, immediately knew who had prepared it, and shrieked,
and fell down in a swoon. The Wezeer was amazed at the event; and they
sprinkled some rose-water upon her, and when she recovered she said, If
my son be yet in the world, no one but he cooked this confection: he is
my son asan Bedr-ed-Deen without doubt: for none but he can prepare
this, except myself, and it was I who taught him to do it.



When the Wezeer heard these words, he rejoiced exceedingly, and
exclaimed, Oh, how I long to behold my brother's son! Will fortune,
indeed, unite us with him? But I look not for our union from any but
God, whose name be exalted!--And he instantly arose, and called out to
his male attendants, saying, Let twenty men of you go to the shop of the
cook, and demolish it, and bind his hands behind him with his turban,
and drag him hither by force, but without any injury to his person. They
replied, Well. The Wezeer then rode immediately to the palace, and,
presenting himself before the Viceroy of Damascus, shewed him the
contents of the letters which he had brought from the Sulan; and the
Viceroy, after kissing them, put them to his head, and said, Who is
thine offender? He answered, A man who is by trade a cook. And instantly
the Viceroy ordered his Chamberlains to repair to his shop; and they
went thither; but found it demolished, and everything that had been in
it broken; for when the Wezeer went to the palace, his servants did as
he had commanded them. They were then waiting his return from the
palace; and Bedr-ed-Deen was saying within himself, What can they have
discovered in the confection, that such an event as this should have
befallen me? And when the Wezeer returned from the Viceroy, and had
received his permission to take his offender and to depart with him, he
entered the encampment, and called for the cook. They brought him,
therefore, with his hands bound behind him with his turban; and when he
saw his uncle he wept bitterly, and said, O my master, what crime have
ye found in me? The Wezeer said to him, Art thou he who cooked the
confection of pomegranate-grains? He answered, Yes: and have ye found in
it anything that requires one's head to be struck off? This, replied the
Wezeer, is the smallest part of thy recompense.--Wilt thou not, said
Bedr-ed-Deen, acquaint me with my crime? The Wezeer answered, Yea,
immediately. And forthwith he called out to the young men, saying, Bring
the camels!

They then took Bedr-ed-Deen, and put him in a chest, and, having locked
him up in it, commenced their journey, and continued on their way till
the approach of night, when they halted and ate, and, taking out
Bedr-ed-Deen, fed him; after which they put him again into the chest,
and in like manner proceeded to another station. Here also they took him
out; and the Wezeer said to him, Art thou he who cooked the confection
of pomegranate grains? He answered, Yes, O my master. And the Wezeer
said, Shackle his feet. And they did so, and restored him to the chest.
They then continued their journey to Cairo; and when they arrived at the
quarter called Er-Reydaneeyeh, the Wezeer commanded to take
out Bedr-ed-Deen again from the chest, and to bring a carpenter, to whom
he said, Make, for this man, a cross.--What, said
Bedr-ed-Deen, dost thou mean to do with it? The Wezeer answered, I will
crucify thee upon it, and nail thee to it, and then parade thee about
the city.--Wherefore, demanded Bedr-ed-Deen, wilt thou treat me
thus?--The Wezeer replied, For thy faulty preparation of the confection
of pomegranate-grains, because thou madest it deficient in
pepper.--Because of its deficiency in pepper, exclaimed Bedr-ed-Deen,
wilt thou do all this to me? Art thou not satisfied with having thus
imprisoned me, and fed me every day with only one meal?--The Wezeer
answered, For its deficiency in pepper, thy recompense shall be nothing
less than death. And Bedr-ed-Deen was amazed, and bewailed his lot, and
remained a while absorbed in reflection. The Wezeer, therefore, said to
him, Of what art thou thinking? He answered, Of imbecile minds, such as
thine; for if thou wert a man of sense thou wouldst not have treated me
in this manner on account of the deficiency of pepper.--It is incumbent
on us, replied the Wezeer, to punish thee, that thou mayest not do the
like again:--to which Bedr-ed-Deen rejoined, The least of the things
thou hast done to me were a sufficient punishment. The Wezeer, however,
said, Thy death is unavoidable.--All this conversation took place while
the carpenter was preparing the cross; and Bedr-ed-Deen was looking on.

Thus they both continued until the approach of night, when
Bedr-ed-Deen's uncle took him and put him again into the chest, saying,
To-morrow shall be thy crucifixion. He then waited until he perceived
that he was asleep; upon which he remounted, and, with the chest borne
before him, entered the city, and repaired to his house: and when he had
arrived there he said to his daughter Sitt-el-osn, Praise be to God who
hath restored to thee the son of thine uncle! Arise, and furnish the
house as it was on the night of the bridal display.--She therefore
ordered her female slaves to do so; and they arose, and lighted the
candles; and the Wezeer brought out the paper upon which he had written
his inventory of the furniture of the house, and read it, and ordered
them to put every thing in its place, so that the beholder would not
doubt that this was the very night of the bridal display. He directed
them to put Bedr-ed-Deen's turban in the place where its owner had
deposited it, and in like manner the trousers, and the purse which was
beneath the mattress, and ordered his daughter to adorn herself as she
was on the bridal night, and to enter the bride-chamber; saying to her,
When the son of thine uncle comes into thy chamber, say to him, Thou
hast loitered since thou withdrewest from me this night:--and request
him to return and converse with thee till day.--Having thus arranged
everything, the Wezeer took out Bedr-ed-Deen from the chest, removed the
shackles from his feet, and stripped him of his outer clothes, leaving
him in his shirt.

All this was done while he was asleep, unconscious of what was passing;
and when he awoke, and found himself in an illuminated vestibule, he
said, within himself, Am I bewildered by dreams, or am I awake? Then
rising, he advanced a little way to an inner door, and looked, and lo,
he was in the house in which the bride had been displayed, and he beheld
the bride-chamber and the couch and his turban and clothes. Confounded
at the sight of these things, he took one step forwards and another
backwards, thinking, Am I asleep or awake? And he began to wipe his
forehead, and exclaimed in his astonishment,



By Allah, this is the dwelling of the bride who was here displayed
before me: and yet I was just now in a chest. And while he was
addressing himself, behold Sitt-el-osn lifted up the corner of the
musquito curtain, and said, O my master, wilt thou not come in? for thou
hast loitered since thou withdrewest from me this night. When he heard
these words he looked at her face, and laughed, and said, Verily, these
appearances are bewildering illusions of a dream! Then entering, he
sighed; and as he reflected upon what had happened to him, he was
perplexed at his situation, and his case seemed involved in obscurity.
Looking at his turban and trousers, and the purse containing the
thousand pieces of gold, he exclaimed, Allah is all-knowing!--but it
seemeth to me that I am bewildered by dreams!--And he was confounded in
the excess of his astonishment. Upon this, therefore, Sitt-el-osn said
to him, Wherefore do I behold thee thus astonished and perplexed? Thou
wast not so in the commencement of the night.--And he laughed, and asked
her, How many years have I been absent from thee?--Allah preserve thee!
she exclaimed. The name of Allah encompass thee! Thou hast
only withdrawn to yonder apartment. What hath passed in thy mind?--On
hearing this he smiled, and replied, Thou hast spoken truth; but when I
withdrew from thee, sleep overcame me, and I dreamt that I was a cook in
Damascus, and that I lived there twelve years; and I
thought that a youth of the sons of the great came to me, accompanied
by a eunuch,--and he proceeded to relate what had happened to him in
consequence of this youth's visit: then drawing his hand over his
forehead, he felt the scar occasioned by the blow, and exclaimed, By
Allah, O my mistress, it seemeth as though it were true; for he struck
me with a stone upon my forehead, and cut it open: it seemeth,
therefore, as though this had really happened when I was awake: but
probably this dream occurred when we were both asleep. I imagined in my
dream that I was transported to Damascus, without arboosh or turban or
trousers, and that I followed the occupation of a cook.--And again, for
a while, he remained utterly confounded. He then said, By Allah, I
imagined that I made a confection of pomegranate-grains containing but
little pepper. Verily I must have been asleep, and in my sleep have seen
all this.--I conjure thee by Allah, said Sitt-el-osn, tell me what more
thou sawest? And he related to her the whole; and added, If I had not
awaked, they would have crucified me upon a wooden cross.--On account of
what? said she. He answered, On account of the deficiency of pepper in
the confection of pomegranate-grains; and I imagined that they
demolished my shop, and broke all my vessels, and put me in a chest, and
brought the carpenter to make a cross of wood; for they intended to
crucify me upon it. Praise be to God, therefore, who caused all this to
occur to me in sleep, and caused it not to happen to me when I was
awake!--Sitt-el-osn, laughing at his words, pressed him to her bosom,
and he in like manner embraced her. Then reflecting again, he said, By
Allah, it seems as if it had happened when I was awake; and I knew not
the reason, nor the truth of the case.--And he composed himself to
sleep, perplexed with his case, and sometimes saying, I saw it in my
sleep,--and other times, I experienced it awake.

Thus he continued until the morning, when his uncle, the Wezeer
Shems-ed-Deen, came in to him, and saluted him; and Bedr-ed-Deen, as
soon as he beheld him, exclaimed, I conjure thee by Allah, tell me art
not thou he who gave orders to bind my hands behind me, and to nail up
my shop, on account of the confection of pomegranate-grains, because it
was deficient in pepper? The Wezeer answered, Know, O my son, that the
truth hath appeared, and what was hidden hath been manifested. Thou art
the son of my brother; and I did not this but to know if thou wert he
who visited my daughter on that night. I was not convinced of this until
I saw that thou knewest the house, and thy turban and trousers and gold,
and the two papers; namely, the one which thou wrotest, and that which
thy father, my brother, wrote: for I had never seen thee before, and
therefore knew thee not; and as to thy mother, I have brought her with
me from El-Barah.--Having thus said, he threw himself upon him, and
wept; and Bedr-ed-Deen, full of astonishment at his uncle's words,
embraced him, and in like manner wept from excess of joy. The Wezeer
then said to him, O my son, the cause of all this was what passed
between me and thy father. And he related to him the circumstances of
their case, and the cause of his father's departure to El-Barah; after
which he sent for 'Ajeeb; and when the father of the youth saw him, he
exclaimed, This is he who threw the stone at me.--This, said the Wezeer,
is thy son. And Bedr-ed-Deen cast himself upon him, and recited the
following verses:--

  Long have I wept on account of our disunion; the tears overflowing
    from my eyelids;
  And I vowed that if Providence should bring us together, I would
    never again mention our separation.
  Joy hath overcome me to such a degree that by its excess it hath
    made me weep.
  O eye, thou hast become so accustomed to tears that thou weepest
    from happiness as from grief.

And when he had uttered these words, his mother, beholding him, threw
herself upon him, and repeated this couplet:--

  Fortune made a vow to torment me incessantly; but thine oath
    hath proved false, O Fortune; therefore expiate it.
  Happiness hath arrived, and the beloved is come to my relief:
    repair then to the messenger of festivity, and hasten.

She afterwards related to him everything that had happened to her; and
he also acquainted her with all that he had suffered; and they offered
up thanks to God for their union. The Wezeer then went up to the Sulan,
and informed him of these occurrences; and the King was astonished, and
ordered that a statement of them should be inserted in the records, to
be preserved to future ages. And the Wezeer resided with his brother's
son, and his own daughter and her son, and with the wife of his brother;
and all of them passed their lives in the enjoyment of the utmost
happiness until they were visited by the terminator of delights, and the
separator of companions.

Such, O Prince of the Faithful, said Jaafar, were the events that
happened to the Wezeer Shems-ed-Deen and his brother Noor-ed-Deen.--By
Allah, exclaimed the Khaleefeh Haroon Er-Rasheed, this story is
wonderful! And he gave one of his own concubines to the young man who
had killed his wife, and appointed him a regular maintenance; and the
young man became one of his companions at the table.